POKER
FUNDAMENTALS
While this chapter involves a decent amount of math, I did my best to keep the number
crunching and equations to a minimum. However, you must fully understand a few of the
formulas because they will ensure you become proficient at many of the most important concepts
in poker. Please do not be turned off by the math and understand that working through this
chapter is well worth the effort.



Basic Concepts
This section covers the basic terms that are required to understand the advanced strategies
explained throughout this book.


Table Positions
Early Position (EP)

At a 9-handed table (Diagram 1) there are three early positions. If there are fewer players seated
at the table, these are the first positions to be removed.


  ♦ UTG (Under the gun) – The first player to act pre-flop.

  ♦ UTG1 – The second player to act pre-flop.
 ♦ UTG2 - The third player to act pre-flop.




                           Diagram 1: Player Positions at the Table

Middle Position (MP)


 ♦ MP or Lojack (LJ) – The fourth player to act pre-flop.

 ♦ MP1 or Hijack (HJ) – The fifth player to act pre-flop.

Late Position (LP)


 ♦ Cutoff (CO) – The next-to-last player to act on all post-flop betting rounds.

 ♦ Button (BN) – The last player to act on all post-flop betting rounds.

Blinds


 ♦ Small Blind (SB) – The next-to-last player to act pre-flop. The first player to act post-flop.

 ♦ Big Blind (BB) – The last player to act pre-flop. The second player to act post-flop.
Poker Terms
Various terms are used throughout this book in order to discuss poker strategy concisely. While
many of these terms may be familiar to you, some may be new. If you are ever unsure about the
meaning of a sentence due to not understanding the terminology, please refer back to this
section.


Active Players: The players involved in the hand, often referred to as the Hero and the
Villain(s).
Hero: The player from whose perspective the hand is played.
Villains: Any of Hero’s opponents involved in the hand.
Pre-flop: Any action that occurs before the flop is dealt.
Post-flop: Any action that occurs after the flop has been dealt.
In Position (IP): The player who acts last due to their relation to the dealer/button.
Out of Position (OOP): The player (or players) who do not act last due to their relation to the
dealer/button.
Relative Position: A player has positional advantage over another player when he gets to act
after him throughout the hand. For example, in the common situation of BB vs BN, BN gets to
act last on each street for the rest of the hand, so BN is IP and conversely BB is OOP.
First In: Refers to the situation when the action gets to a player and no other player has
previously voluntary entered the pot. For example, if Hero is on the BN and everyone folds
around to him, he has the option to be the first in by either calling or raising.
Stack Size and Stack Depth: Stack depth is always displayed in terms of big blinds.
For example, if a player has 1,000,000 chips and the big blind is 100,000, he only has 10 big
blinds (bb).
Effective Stack: The smallest stack size among the active players. In a heads-up pot the
effective stack size determines the maximum amount either player can lose.
Bet-size: Bet-sizes are displayed either in big blinds (for example, Villain bets 2bb, 5bb, 25bb)
or as a fraction of the pot (for example 1/3-pot, 1/2-pot, 2/3-pot).
The Nuts: A poker hand is considered “the nuts” if it is the strongest possible hand at a specific
moment. For example, AA is the nuts pre-flop. J♣T♣ is the nuts on 9♥8♥7♦ but is no longer the
nuts if the turn brings another heart, 9, 8, or 7 because stronger hands than a straight are then
possible.
Effective Nuts: A poker hand that is not the actual nuts but is strong enough that it should be
played as if it were the nuts. For example, 7♣7♥ is the effective nuts on 8♥7♦2♦.
Speculative Hand: A hand that is unlikely to be best at the moment but can improve to a
powerful holding later.
Air: A hand with no showdown value or drawing potential that can only win the pot by bluffing.
Bluff Catcher: A hand that can only beat a bluff.
Pure Bluff: A bet or raise made with a hand that has little or no chance of improving on a later
betting round with the intention of making a better hand fold on the current betting round.
Semi-Bluff: A bet or raise made with a hand that has a decent chance of improving on a later
betting round with the intention of making a better hand fold on the current betting round.
Showdown Value: A poker hand has showdown value if, when compared to Villain’s range, it
can realistically win at showdown.
Nut Advantage or Nut Threshold: A player has the nut advantage if the effective nut hands
make up a larger portion of his range than the Villain’s range.
Passive Player: A player who tends to play his strong made hands and bluffs in a more passive
manner than he should.
Aggressive Player: A player who tends to take the betting initiative when given the opportunity.
Regular: A player who regularly shows up in games and is assumed to play well and be
experienced.
Pocket Pair: A starting hand with two cards of the same rank. For example, A♣A♦, J♠J♦, or
5♣5♥.
Draw: A player is drawing or on a draw if he has an incomplete hand and needs to improve with
an additional card in order to have significant showdown value.
Gutshot or Inside Straight Draw: A draw with four outs to make a straight.
For example, 9-7 on Q-10-6.
Open-Ended Straight Draw (OESD): A draw that has eight outs to make a straight. For
example, J9 on QT6.
Broadway: The nut straight, A-T.
K, Q, J, and T are referred to as broadway cards.
Any Two Cards (ATC): Refers to a range containing all possible holdings, often used for
aggressive actions that can be taken regardless of a player’s holding.
Coin Flip / Race: A situation where both players are all-in and both players have roughly a 50%
chance to win the pot.
Cooler: A situation when two strong hands clash and there is no way for the player with the
weaker hand to fold.
Versus (vs): Another word for “against”. For example, Hero’s AA vs Villain’s J9.
Toy Game: A simplified game used to model specific aspects of a real game.
Game Abstraction: A game where there are restrictions placed on the players’ strategies
intended to reduce the size and complexity of the game. The main types of abstractions are:
Information Abstraction: A situation where some of the information states are bundled
together. For example, on the flop A♣K♣Q♣, the hands 3♥2♥, 3♠2♠ and 3♦2♦ can be considered
as the same hand for strategic purposes.
Action Abstractions: A situation where some of the actions in the real game are assumed to not
be usable. For example, removing a player’s strategic option of calling or betting certain
amounts, such as one big blind into a 100 big blind pot, or 100 big blinds into a 1 big blind pot.
Rake: Rake is the commission fee taken by a cardroom running a poker game. Some poker
rooms charge a time-based rake, so each player has to pay a fixed amount per hour that they are
sitting at the table, and other cardrooms charge rake as a percentage of the pot, usually 2.5% to
10% of the pot, depending on the game. There is usually a cap to the amount of money the
casino takes from each pot. For example, in a poker game with 5% rake capped at $5, the
maximum amount the house can take from the pot will be $5 from any pot that is $100 or larger.
Most poker rooms also have the rule that rake is only taken if a flop is dealt, so any action that
finishes without a flop being dealt will not be subject to rake. For example, if MP raises to 2.5bb,
BN 3-bets to 8bb, MP 4-bets to 24bb and everyone else folds, the house won’t take any money
from the pot because the flop wasn’t dealt, regardless of how much money went into the pot.
Calling Station: A player who never folds a made hand regardless of the action.


Player Actions
Call (c): Matching the current bet to continue in the hand.
Limp (l): Entering the pot by calling the minimum bet (1bb).
Raise (r): Increasing the price the other players have to call to enter the pot. Raising is also
known as a 2-bet because the action of posting the big blind is considered as the first bet.
Check (x): The option to pass your turn. Pre-flop, it can only be done from the big blind if no
one else raised. Post-flop, it can be done if you are first to act or if other players have checked to
you.
Voluntary Put Money in the Pot (VPIP): When a player enters the pot by either calling or
raising. Posting the blinds does not count as VPIP because the blinds are forced (not voluntary)
bets.
Raise First In (RFI): When a player is first in and enters the pot by raising. Also referred to as
open raising.
Two-bet (2-bet or 2b): The blinds are considered as the “First Bet”, then the first person to raise
the pot is making a “Second Bet” or “Two Bet”; RFI is a special case of 2bet when there are no
limpers.
Steal: Raise First In from BN, CO or SB.
Isolate: Raising after someone has entered the pot with the intention of playing heads-up post-
flop vs that player.
Minraise: When a player raises the minimum allowed, which is two times the last bet amount.
Minbet: Making the minimum bet allowed. Post-flop, this is one big blind.
Overbet: Making a bet that is larger than the size of the pot.
Three Bet (3-bet or 3b): Making a re-raise, which is to increase the bet after someone else
raised.
Resteal: 3-betting after someone else steals.
All-in or Push: Betting all of your chips.
Open Shove or Open Jam: Going all-in when no one else has entered the pot before you.
3-bet-Jam, 3-bet-Shove, Reshove, or Rejam: Moving all-in after someone else has already
raised.
Four-bet (4-bet or 4b), 5-bet and any subsequent number of bets: Refers to the number of
bets that have been made during the current betting round.
Cold 4-bet: 4-betting when the player making the 4-bet was not the initial raiser. For example:
UTG opens to 2bb, BN 3-bets to 5bb and the BB cold 4-bets to 12.5bb.
Cold Calling (cc): Calling a single raise when in position, or calling a 3-bet or 4-bet when you
have not previously voluntarily put money in the pot. For example, MP opens to 2bb, CO 3-bets
to 6bb, BN folds and SB cold calls.
Squeeze (sqz): 3-betting after someone raised and someone else called. For example, UTG1
opens to 2bb, CO cold calls, BN squeezes to 9bb.
Continuation Bet (C-bet): Post-flop bet made by the player who was the last aggressor in the
previous betting round.
Donk Bet or Lead Out (DK): When the player who is OOP bets into the aggressor on the
previous betting round, denying the option to C-bet.
Slow Play or Trap: To play a premium holding in a passive manner, hoping to induce a value-
bet from an inferior hand or a bluff.


Action Lines
A “line” is a specific sequence of betting actions taken by a player.


Limp/Fold (l/f): A player enters the pot by limping (calling the big blind) and then folds to a
raise.
Limp/Raise (l/r): A player enters the pot by limping and then re-raises after someone else raises.
Check/Fold (x/f): A player checks and then folds to an opponent’s bet.
Check/Call (x/c): A player checks and then calls an opponent’s bet.
Check/Raise (x/r): A player checks and then raises an opponent’s bet.
Bet/Bet (b/b): Betting the turn after the opponent called or x/c the flop. Also known as double-
barreling or two-barreling.
Bet/Bet/Bet (b/b/b): Betting the flop, turn, and river after the opponent called or x/c flop and
turn. Also known as triple-barreling.


Hand Range
When players first start learning to play the game of poker, the first thing they simply must
master is understanding hand values and, as a result, a beginner player only thinks about his own
hand’s strength. Later, as players become more advanced, they start thinking about their
opponents’ hands as well. Eventually, they get to the point where they don’t try to put their
opponents on a single hand, but instead assign them a range of possible holdings and work to
narrow that range down based on each of their opponent’s actions throughout the hand (also
known as hand reading). The best players take this even further and, while thinking about their
opponents range, they also think about their own range and how it fares against their opponents
range, in terms of equity, range polarization, balance, nut advantage and many other concepts
that will be addressed throughout this book.

    Poker may appear like a simple game to a novice, but the classic saying of “it takes a
  minute to learn, but a lifetime to master” certainly holds true.

13×13 Hand Grid

The hand grid (Hand Range 1) is a graphical representation of a range. It contains all 169
possible pre-flop hands: 13 pocket pairs (5.88% of all hands) that are located diagonally from top
left to top right, 78 suited hands (23.53% of all hands) located in the upper right half represented
with an “s”, and 78 offsuit hands (70.59% of all hands) located in the bottom left half
represented with an “o”.
                       Hand Range 1: The Basic Hand Grid


Example
Game: Live Cash Game
Effective Stack: $200
Players: 9
Blinds: $1/$2 (no ante)
Pre-flop: UTG raises to $10. We have observed this player for a while and our perception is that
he is very tight, opting to only play premium starting hands. We have also noticed that he raises
his stronger hands and calls with medium-strength hands.

  Once a player decides to put money into the pot, they’ve revealed some amount of information
about their range. We can use that information to assign the Villain a starting range of hands.
   Start by asking which hands are consistent with Villain’s actions, and then add those to the
range one by one.
AA: It is definitely possible for Villain to hold AA at this point, and he would most definitely
want to raise with it (unless he was known to slow play).
KK-99: All pocket pairs between KK and 99 are also likely to be in the Villain’s raising range.
ATs+: AKs, AQs, AJs, and ATs are also likely to be in Villain’s raising range.
AJo+, KQs: These are also hands that almost everyone raises from all positions.
In total, these hands make up 7% of all possible hands (Hand Range 2).
   Now consider the next tier of hands the Villain may play from this position, as well as his
possible actions with them.

   ATo, A9s-A2s, KQo, KJo, 88-66, KJs, KTs, QJs, QTs, JTs, T9s, 98s (Hand Range 3), are
all medium strength hands that this particular Villain may not consider good enough to raise but
may be good enough to see a cheap flop. From past experience, you might know this opponent
likes to limp these hands.
   This strategy of raising with the premium hands and limping with medium-strength hands is
not recommended because it is easy to exploit by simply raising when the Villain limps (because
you know their hand can’t be too strong) and by folding your medium-strength and weak hands
when Villain raises (because you know they have a premium hand). Many Villains may not even
be aware of what their range is in a particular situation but, by paying attention, you can notice
their tendencies and adjust to take advantage of them.
   By splitting his range in this way, Villain also makes his opponent’s post-flop hand reading a
lot easier. For example, if Villain never raises hands such as T9s or medium pocket pairs then,
after they raise, their opponents will know on a flop like 8♣7♠6♦ that they can’t have straights,
sets or two pairs, and that their range will consist only of overpairs and overcards.
Hand Range 2: A Typical 7% Raising Range
                    Hand Range 3: A Typical Mixed Raising/Limping Range

  The Villain would be much better-off playing a simpler strategy where they only enter the pot
by raising with all hands they want to play, making them more difficult to read. This is a solid
strategy that will work well from early position (Hand Range 4).
                    Hand Range 4: A Typical Early Position Raising Range

   You must be careful about the information you give away after taking certain actions, because
the more information your opponents have about your range, the better decisions they can make.
Professional poker players come to the table with a well thought out plan. They have done the
work off the table and constructed their ranges in such a way that they are not easily exploitable.
Of course, just memorizing a few range charts won’t make anyone a world-class player but
understanding the ranges in play will help you avoid common mistakes, allowing you to make
better decisions.


Combinatorics
Combinatorics is the practice of breaking down ranges and counting individual combinations
(combos) of hands in order to make better decisions. The formula to find the number of
combinations of k objects you can choose from a set of n objects is as follows (note that in all of
these examples the “!” represents the factorial function, meaning that you must multiply the
number in question by all lower digits, e.g. 6! = 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 720):




                                Diagram 2: Poker Suits 4x4 Grid

  Pre-flop there are 169 distinct poker hands but, when we account for suits, the number of
specific two-card poker hand combinations in a 52-card deck is:
Pocket Pairs (PP)

The formula to calculate the number of combinations of PP in a player’s range is:




  where X is the number of available cards remaining in the deck.
  For any PP, this calculation is:




  The diagonal line in the 13×13 hand grid (Hand Range 1) represents PP. There are 13 different
ranks of pairs and 6 different ways to make a PP of any rank, so there are 13 × 6 = 78
combinations of pocket pairs.

Unpaired Hands
The formula to calculate the number of combinations for unpaired hands is:




   where X and Y are the number of available cards remaining in the deck for each rank. Take
AK for example. There are four aces in the deck and four kings in the deck, 4 × 4 = 16, so there
are 16 combinations of AK (and any other unpaired hand) available.

Suited Hands

Suited hands are represented above the PP diagonal in the 13×13 hand grid. There are 78 total
hands above the diagonal and four different suits for each, so there are 78 × 4 = 312 total combos
of suited hands.

Offsuit Hands

Offsuit hands are represented below the PP diagonal in the 13×13 hand grid. There are 12 ways
to make a non-paired offsuited hand, so there are 78 × 12 = 936 total combos of offsuit hands.

     Therefore, in total there are 78 + 312 + 936 = 1,326 total different poker hand combos


Hand Ranges as Combinations
Thinking about hand ranges in terms of combos is much more difficult than “putting your
opponent on a single hand” and requires a lot of practice to become proficient at it, but making
this switch is something all players must do if they want to progress in their poker careers. All
the best players in the world think about situations in terms of ranges and combos, not individual
hands. This process will be difficult and tedious at first, but with practice it will become second
nature.


Example
Game: Live Cash game
Stacks: Hero $1,200, Villain $760
Players: 9
Blinds: $5/$10 (no ante)
Pre-flop: Hero is in the BB with A♦3♦.
HJ is a regular. He raises to $25 and everyone folds to Hero, who calls.
  Start by giving HJ a standard HJ opening range of 23% hands. You will rarely know Villain’s
exact range, so you have to estimate. Hand Range 5 is a reasonable estimate.




                     Hand Range 5: A Reasonable Hijack Opening Range

Pre-flop Range Breakdown
Pocket Pairs: Villain’s range contains all 13 ranks of pocket pairs, and there are 6 combos of
each rank:




Suited Hands: Villain’s range contains 30 distinct suited hands, and there are 4 suits of each:




Offsuit Hands: Villain’s range contains 9 distinct offsuit hands, and there are 12 of each:




Total Range




Post-flop Range Breakdown

Now we consider how Villain’s range breaks down on a specific flop. We will consider the flop
of A♣J♥9♥.


Made Hands
On this flop Villain has a total of 157 combos of made hands, as follows.


Sets (7 Combos)
AA: The A♣ is on the flop, and we block the A♦ (meaning it is in our hand), so the only combo
left is A♠A♥.
JJ/99: Using the pocket pairs formula for JJ:
The J♥ is on the flop, so there are only three possible jacks left in Villain’s range: J♠, J♥ and J♣.




The process is exactly the same for 99, so we have a total of:
1 combination of AA, 3 combinations of JJ, and 3 combinations of 99.


Two Pair (10 Combos)
AJ: The A♣ and the J♥ are on the flop, we block the A♦, so there are 2 aces and 3 jacks
remaining.




A9: Villain’s range doesn’t have any offsuit A-9. The A♣ and the 9♥ are on the flop, so A♣9♣
and A♥9♥ are not possible. We block the A♦, so Villain can’t have A♦9♦, which makes A♠9♠ the
only A-9 combo left in Villain’s range.
J9: Villain’s range doesn’t have any offsuit J9. The J♥ and the 9♥ are on the flop, so there are 3
combos of J9s in Villain’s range.


Top Pair (38 Combos)
AK: There are 2 aces and 4 kings left:




Do the same process for AQ and AT for a total of total 24 combos.
A8s-A2s: The A♣ is in the flop, and we block the A♦ so there are only 2 suits left for each one of
the 7 different ranks of suited aces: 7 * 2 = 14 combos


Middle Pair (30 Combos)
KJ, QJ: 24 combos (repeat the same process used for top pairs).
JTs, J8s: 6 combos.


Bottom Pair (15 Combos)
K9s, Q9s, T9s, 98s, 97s


Pocket Pair 1/2 (12 Combos)
KK, QQ: Pocket pair 1/2 means pocket pairs between top and middle flop card.


Pocket Pair 2/3 (6 Combos)
TT: Pocket pair 2/3 means pocket pairs between middle and bottom flop card.


Underpair (39 Combos)
33: We have the 3♦ in our hand so there are only 3 combos left of 33. The other pairs (36
combos) are 88, 77, 66, 55, 44, 22.


Draws
Villain has 72 drawing hands, made up as follows.


Flush Draw: (8 combos)
Straight Flush Draw: 6 combos: K♥Q♥, K♥T♥, Q♥T♥, Q♥8♥, T♥8♥, 8♥7♥
Nut Flush Draw: 0 combos: the nut flush draw is also top pair and it has already been accounted
for when counting the top pairs: A♥K♥, A♥Q♥, A♥T♥, A♥8♥, A♥7♥, A♥6♥, A♥5♥, A♥4♥,
A♥3♥, A♥2♥.
Second Nut Flush Draw: 1 combo: K♥8♥
Other Flush Draws: 1 combo: 7♥6♥


8-Out Straight Draw (18 Combos)
QT: There are 16 combos of QT, but we already accounted for Q♥T♥, so there are only 15
combos left.
T8s: We already accounted for T♥8♥, so there are only 3 combos left.


4-Out Straight Draw (36 Combos)
KQ, KT: There are 16 combinations of each, but we already accounted for K♥Q♥ and K♥T♥, for
a total of 30 combinations.
Q8s, 87s: We already accounted for Q♥8♥ and 8♥7♥, so there are only 3 suits left of each hand,
for a total of 6 combos.


Air (6 Combos)
Accounting for card removal on the flop (because A♦, 3♦, A♣, J♥ and 9♥ are not available),
Villain’s range goes from 306 combos to 225 combos, and 219 combos are either a made hand or
a draw, so only 6 combos in Villain range are pure air, these being K♣8♣, K♦8♦, K♠8♠, 7♣6♣,
7♦6♦, 7♠6♠


Full Range Stats
Instead of going through this tedious process by hand each and every time we want to break
down a poker situation, we can use range analysis software such as flopzilla.com or an equity
calculator such as power-equilab.com to get the flop stats effortlessly just by entering the ranges
in play. In this case the range breaks down as follows. Note that the percentages will add up to
more than 100% as some hands fall into two categories.


Set: 3.11%
Two Pair: 4.44%
Top Pair: 16.9%
Mid Pairs: 18.63%
Weak Pair: 26.7%
Flush Draw: 8%
OESD: 8.89%
Gutshot: 17.8%
Air: 2.67%



Key Metrics
Pot Odds and Outs
Pot odds represents the ratio between what you stand to gain in a poker hand and what you have
to risk in order to get it. Pot odds are important because, when compared to the probability of
winning the hand, they can help players estimate the profitability of making a call.
   Simply put, pot odds are a reward-to-risk ratio. For example, consider a hypothetical poker
situation where you know Villain holds A♠K♠ on A♣8♥7♥ and you hold Q♥J♥. The pot is $100,
and Villain goes all-in for another $100.
   You need to decide which line is best, calling or folding. So, how do you know if calling with
your draw is a profitable play?
   First, you need to figure out your pot odds.




  You need to risk $100 to win $200 (Villain bet + starting pot) so pot odds are:




  Pot odds can also be calculated as a percentage using the formula:




  So, in this case:




  This means you need to win at least 33.3% of the time to justify calling, assuming no
abnormal tournament payout or bankroll implications.
  Now to calculate your probability of winning the hand, let’s introduce the concept of outs.

Outs

An out is any unseen card that if dealt will improve your hand. In the case of Q♥J♥, any heart
will improve us to the best hand because we know Villain has AK with no hearts (unless both
exactly the A♥ K♥ come on the turn and river).
  There are 13 hearts in the deck, and since we hold the Q♥J♥ and the 8♥7♥ are on the flop, the
remaining hearts in the deck are: A♥, K♥, T♥, 9♥, 6♥, 5♥, 4♥, 3♥, 2♥ for a total of 9 outs. Now
we can use the following formulas to calculate the probability of making our hand based on the
number of outs:




  In the following sections, I will explain each formula in detail, although in this case we are
only interested in the third formula because our opponent is all-in, meaning if we call his bet, we
get to see both the turn and river.


Probability of Catching a Heart on the Turn
A deck of cards contains 52 cards. We know 5 of them, our 2 hole cards and the 3 cards on the
flop. That leaves 47 unknown cards, 9 of which will give us the best hand and 38 will not, so the
ratio of non-flush cards to flush cards is: 38:9 or 4.2:1.
  To convert 4.2:1 to a percentage, simply add the two numbers in the ratio (4.2 and 1) together
and divide 100 by that number:




Probability of Catching a Heart on the River (if Already on the Turn)
A deck of cards contains 52 cards, and we know 6 of them, our 2 hole cards and the 4 cards on
the flop and turn. That leaves 46 unknown cards, 9 of which will give us the best hand and 37
that will not, so the ratio of non-flush cards to flush cards is: 37:9 or 4.1:1.




  Using the same method as before to convert the ratio to a percentage we get:
Probability of Catching at Least One Heart on the Turn or River




  Finally, converting these to a percentage gives:




   Now all we have to do is compare the pot odds to the odds of making our hand. Remember,
the Villain pushed all-in for $100 into a $100 pot (Table 1).




                                             Table 1

  When using the x:y ratio form (odds against making your hand) the hand odds have to be
lower than the pot odds for the call to be profitable. In this case 2 > 1.86.
  When using the percentage form, the hand odds have to be greater than the pot odds for the
call to be profitable, in this case 35% > 33%.
  A good way to think about this is, “I know I will win 35% of the time and I only need to win
33% of the time. Since 35% is larger than 33%, I have a profitable call.”
  Here you are getting the right odds, so calling with the flush draw is profitable.
  An easy way mentally to approximate the odds percentage using outs is as follows:




  In our example this works as follows.



  The following table (Table 2) gives the odds for varying numbers of outs.
                               Table 2: Outs to Odds Chart

  The following table (Table 3) identifies the number of outs generated by typical hold’em
scenarios.
                                Table 3: Common NLH Scenarios

Backdoor Draw/Runner-Runner Draw

A backdoor draw is a drawing hand that needs to catch two outs to improve to the best hand. The
probability of completing a backdoor flush draw (BDFD) is given by:




  The probability of completing a backdoor straight draw (BDSTD) with a three-card rundown
such as JT9 is equal to the probability of catching a Q or an 8 on the turn that will generate eight
more outs to complete, plus the probability of catching a K or a 7 on the turn that will generate
four more outs to complete.
     Note that the probability of completing a one-out draw on the turn or river is 4.26%. This
  is almost the same as the probability of completing either of these backdoor draws, so
  having a BDFD or BDSTD on the flop is roughly as valuable as having one extra out.

Further Important Drawing Concepts

The following concepts are also important to keep in mind when considering drawing situations.


  ♦ Dead Outs: Dead outs improve your hand to the made hand you are drawing to while at
    the same time improving Villain’s hand to a hand that beats you. For example, having an
    open-ended straight draw generally means that you have eight outs to improve to the best
    hand. However, if the Villain holds a flush draw, two of your outs will also make the
    Villain a flush. So, in reality, you only have six live outs.

  ♦ Drawing Dead: A player is drawing dead when all the outs are dead. So even if Hero’s
    hand improves, he will still lose to a player who either already has a better hand or will
    improve to a better hand.

  ♦ Implied Odds: This refers to how much you may expect to win on future betting rounds
    when you complete your draw.

  ♦ Reverse Implied Odds: This refers to how much you may lose on future betting rounds
    in the event that you complete your draw but lose to a better hand.

  ♦ Pot Committed: You are pot committed when the pot odds generated by your remaining
    stack are greater than the odds of winning the hand. Thus folding to any bet or raise
    would be an incorrect play.


Equity (Eq)
Equity is your share of the pot as determined by your current chance of winning or splitting at a
point in the hand. It is how often you would win the pot on average if there were no further
betting and all cards were played out. Equity can be easily obtained using an equity calculator.
  Here are two that you can access for free: pokerstrategy.com/poker-software-tools/equilab-
holdem or propokertools.com/simulations.
  There are various different ways to consider equity as we will now see.

Hand vs Hand Equity

Poker hands cannot be ranked according to strength because each hand’s strength is relative to
the opponent’s hand or range of hands.
   Let’s examine the following three hands using equity and try to decide which one of them is
the strongest: AKo, JTs, or 22 (Table 4).




                          Table 4: Hand vs Hand Equity Calculations


As we can see, AKo has more equity than JTs, and 22 has more equity than AKo. You would
think that, through logical deduction, 22 must also have more equity than JTs. However, it turns
out that JTs actually has more equity than 22. Therefore there is no way to independently rank
these three hands.
   Even if hand vs hand equity can’t be used to rank poker hands in a vacuum, it can help us
develop an understanding of the way poker hands match up against each other (Table 5).
                          Table 5: Common Preflop Equity Matchups

Hand vs Range Equity

When playing poker, you will never know for sure what your opponents two hole cards are.
However, you can assign a range of hands based on their actions, and then calculate your equity
against that range.


Example
Game: $100 3-max online Sit & Go
Stacks: BN 30bb, SB 10bb, BB 20bb
Players: 3 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) BN folds. SB is a tight player who goes all-in for 10bb. You are in the BB with
Q♣T♠ and have to decide whether to call or fold.
  Using the pot odds formula gives:
  The call will be profitable if your hand can win at least 45% of the time (i.e. has 45% equity).
Since you know Villain is a tight player, you can assign him a tighter range than you would
assign a standard or loose player (Hand Range 6).
Hand Range 6: SB Opening Jamming Range (10bb)
          Table 6: Various Hand Equities and Equity Differences Compared to 45%

Your hand Q♣T♠ does not have enough equity to call vs this range (you will win 43% of the
time but need to win 45% of the time), so you should fold.

Range Versus Range Equity

Range vs range equity is useful in post-flop scenarios where you are concerned about how each
player’s range gets affected by the community cards.


Example
Game: $109 9-max online MTT
Effective Stack: 40bb
Players: 9 (12.5% ante)
Pre-flop: (2.625bb) Play folds to you in the CO with A♦A♣ and you raise 2.25bb. Everyone
folds to the BB who is a strong regular. You estimate BB defends vs CO with the following
strategy (Hand Range 7).
   You opened a standard CO range of about 31.2% hands (Hand Range 8).
Hand Range 7: BB defend vs CO 2.25x (40bb)
 • 3-bet 9.7% / • Call 56.8% / • Fold 33.5%
                                  Hand Range 8: CO (40bb)
                             • Raise 2.25x: 31.2% / • Fold 68.8%

   The equity distribution on various flops of the CO 31.2% range vs BB 56.8% calling range is
as follows (Table 7).
                          Table 7: Equity Distribution on Various Flops

  Comparing range vs range equity, we can see that pre-flop, Hero has the advantage, but the
equity distribution will change depending on the texture of the flop. It is important for Hero to
understand how equities shift on various boards because that has a dramatic effect on the way the
hand will play out. Let’s consider a specific example with a flop of 8♥7♠5♠.
  According to the equities table, this flop favors the BB. It improved their range equity from
41.5% to 50.33%, making them a tiny favorite. Your overall range equity was reduced from
58.5% to 49.67% which means that, in general, you should play much more cautiously because
BB will have many high equity hands such as straights, sets, two pairs and combo draws. If you
choose to c-bet the flop with a high frequency, the BB can x/r you very effectively. If you choose
to check back the flop, the BB can start betting aggressively on many turns and rivers. Even if
the equity of your actual hand A♦A♣ is high (70.83%) you should, in general, look to play
passively and check behind with a high frequency of hands that can improve on a variety of
turns, allowing them to easily call bets from the opponent.
   Since A♦A♣ can call most turn bets and bluff-catch effectively, you check back. Play
continues as follows:


Turn: (6.125bb) 8♥7♠5♠J♥ [2 players]
Villain bets the full pot, 6.125bb, Hero calls.


River: (18.375bb) 8♥7♠5♠J♥2♣ [2 players]
Villain moves all-in for 1.7 × Pot (31bb). Hero calls. Villain shows T♥3♥ for a busted draw.

  In this spot A♦A♣ is an excellent bluff catcher. All the draws missed and you hold no hearts or
spades in your hand, which makes it a little more likely Villain is bluffing because you do not
block the obvious bluffing hands (flush draws).
  Of course, it is impossible to memorize all possible equity matchups between hands and
ranges, or to make the exact calculations while playing. However, understanding equity is the
key for poker success. You simply must spend some time working with an equity calculator in
order to get familiar with some of the most common situations that you will face on a regular
basis.

     Knowing your own range composition is key, as each hand in your range must be played
  in the most profitable way possible in the context of that range.


Expected Value (EV)
EV is what you expect to win or lose on average in the long run in a given situation.




Mathematically, EV is the sum of the probability of each possible outcome multiplied by its
payoff.




Where:
%W = How often you win; in other words, your equity in the pot
$W = How much money you can win
%L = How often you lose; in other words, 100% – your equity
$R = How much money you have to risk by taking the action


  ♦ If the result of this equation is a positive number, the play has a positive expectation
     (+EV) and will win money in the long run.

  ♦ If the result of this equation is a negative number, the play has a negative expectation (-
     EV) and will lose money in the long run.

  ♦ If the result of this equation is zero, the play has a neutral expectation (0EV) and will
     break even in the long run.

  By definition, the EV of folding is always zero. Once money has been put into the pot it no
longer belongs to you. The EV calculation starts from the point you decide your next action.
Therefore, as folding does not put any more money at risk, the EV of folding is 0.
   EV calculations are very powerful because they dictate how the game should be played. If
players knew the exact EV of each action for every single spot, playing would be trivial as all
they would have to do is always choose the highest EV option.


Example
Game: $100 3-max online Jackpot Sit & Go
Stacks: BN 35bb, SB 15bb, BB 25bb
Players: 3 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) Hero is in the BN with A♠5♠
Hero raises 2x, SB is a regular who goes all-in for 15bb. BB folds and the action gets back to
Hero who has a decision.

  Take your time and analyze the parts of the EV equation one by one.
  Villain is a regular, so you can assign them a standard 20% rejamming range (Hand Range 9).
                 Hand Range 9: A Standard SB 20% Rejamming Range vs BN


Using an equity calculator, you will see that your A♠5♠ has 43.31% equity vs the SB range. So,

                                        %W = 43.31%
   You can win the SB stack of 15bb plus the dead money (the big blind plus 2bb that you
raised). So,

                                     $W = 15+1+2 = 18bb

  The frequency with which you lose the pot is:

                               %L = 100% - 43.31% = 56.69%

  The amount you need to call is:

                                          $R = 13bb

  Putting this all together:




  You decide to call with A♠5♠ because it is the higher EV option. When you call, you have an
EV of 0.4 and when you fold, you have an EV of 0.

Win Rate

Another way to visualize EV is in big blinds won or lost per 100 hands (bb/100). Since we are
calculating EV in big blinds, all that is needed is to multiply EV by 100 (EV × 100).
   Poker winnings should be measured over the long run. The ability to consistently make better
decisions allows the best players to win in the long run. They take the highest EV action over
and over again.
   As seen in this example, a player who calls every time with A♠5♠ will make on average 40 big
blinds per every 100 hands more than a player who always folds.




    Even if 0.4bb might seem like a small reward-to-risk for calling Villain’s all-in for a big
  portion of your stack, it is these small edges, taken over thousands of hands, that make the
  difference between a world-class player and a rookie. Over the course of a lifetime, these
  edges materialize into hundreds of thousands, or even millions of dollars.

    Knowing the hand equity vs Villain’s range can help us predict EV and make better
  decisions.

EV Rescaled

It is often useful to think of EV as a fraction of the pot:




Example
The Pot is $150 and you are given the EV of two different actions, A and B:

                                            EV(A) = $75
                                            EV(B) = $100

  The EV rescaled of both actions is:




  Action B captures 17% more of the pot than Action A, making it definitively the better option.


Fold Equity (FE)
Fold equity represents the extra equity you stand to gain from the likelihood of your opponent
folding to a bet.
Example
Game: $215 Online Tournament
Effective stack: 100bb
Players: 9 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) Hero is in the CO with 8♦7♦ and raises to 2.2bb. Play folds to the BB who calls
with 3♦3♥.
Flop: (4.9bb) A♠K♠5♣ [2 players]
BB checks. What should Hero do?

  In this example, the BB has 71% equity with the small pair while Hero has 29%. However, if
you bet this flop, you can realistically expect Villain to fold over 75% of the time with their
junky holding. So, using our FE formulas we have:




  However, the term Fold Equity is often used in a less technical sense, simply to refer to the
chance of getting a player to fold.


Example
Game: $109 9-max online MTT
Stacks: BN 35bb, SB 25bb, BB 15bb
Players: 9 (12.5% ante)
Pre-flop: (2.625bb) Hero is in the BB with T♦5♣
BN raises 2bb. He is an overly aggressive player who plays too many hands but tends to give up
when facing resistance. SB folds, and Hero has a decision.

  Your hand is pretty bad and you would normally just fold it against a regular opponent.
However, you know Villain plays too many hands from the BN. Since a wide range of hands is
more difficult to defend vs re-raises, you suspect Villain might be over-folding (folding too
often) if you move all-in in this spot. So, how much fold equity do you need to go all-in
profitably with T♦5♣?
   To answer this question, you can use the EV equation making EV = 0 and %Villain Folds =
FE




  Now analyze each part of the equation.
  When Villain folds you get to win the entire pot:



  Since you are moving all-in, Villain can no longer re-raise you. So,




  and




  If you get called, you will play for a total pot of 31.625bb. You are risking an extra 14bb and
estimate T♦5♣ will have about 31% equity vs the Villain’s calling range.




  Putting everything together:
   You need at least 47% fold equity to go all-in profitably with T♦5♣.
   You estimate Villain is opening ~60% hands on the BN (Hand Range 10) and calling the BB
all-in with 28.8% hands (Hand Range 11).
                        Hand Range 10: 60% BN Opening Range

BN Calling Frequency:
                     Hand Range 11: BN Open vs BB Rejam (15bb)
                              • Call 48% / • Fold 52%

The BN Folding Frequency is:




The minimum fold equity needed is 51% and Hero has 52%. So, moving all-in with T♦5♣ is a
(barely) profitable play.


Hand Playability
If there were no betting in poker and players were forced to go all-in every hand, the expected
value for each player would be their hand equity × the pot.




Example
In a heads-up gambling game each player has to ante $100 and there is no future betting. Player1
gets dealt 4♦4♠ and Player2 gets 9♥8♥.
What is the expected payoff for each player?


The equity of 4♦4♠ = 47.26%




The equity of 9♥8♥ = 52.74%




  In this toy game both players get to realize 100% of their equity. However, in real poker
games where betting happens across multiple streets, if a player folds before showdown, they
give up equity in the pot which is transferred to the remaining players. This dynamic is known as
equity realization.

Equity Realization (EqR)

Equity realization refers to the fraction of equity that is materialized in EV. Hands that capture a
bigger percentage of the pot than their equity share are said to over-realize their equity. Hands
that capture a smaller percentage of the pot than their equity share are said to under-realize their
equity.


Example
Game: $55 9-max online MTT
Stacks: UTG 50bb, BB 40bb
Players: 9 (12.5% ante)
Pre-flop: (2.625bb) UTG is a regular who raises 2bb. Everyone folds to Hero in the BB with
9♣5♦ who now has a decision.

   As UTG is a regular, you assume they are opening a standard 16% range (Hand Range 12)
that can easily defend vs 3-bets, so 3-bet bluffing with 9♣5♦ is out of the question. The decision
is between calling and folding.
   If you were calling for all of your chips, the solution would be to simply compare the pot odds
to your hand equity and call if your hand equity were greater than the pot odds.
   9♣5♦ equity vs UTG range = 29.5%




   Clearly your hand equity is a lot better than the pot odds. However, as you are not all-in, if you
make the call you will have to play post-flop where different outcomes can occur. Villain can bet
aggressively and sometimes force you to fold the best hand. Villain can make a stronger hand
than yours and you can lose a big pot. You could flop a premium hand but get no action, or even
occasionally stack the Villain. Unfortunately, raw equity (the equity as if you were all-in) does
not account for any of these possibilities.
                        Hand Range 12: UTG 16% Opening Range

  How can you know if your call is +EV if you have no idea of the type of situation you will
end up facing?

The equity realization factor tells you how much equity you can expect to realize on average
across all possible scenarios. So, if you know both a hand equity (Eq) and equity realization
factor (EqR), you can calculate the hand expectation for more complex scenarios, including post-
flop play.




  Conversely, if you know the Eq and EV, you can solve the equation for EqR:




  Rescaling EV to %EV:




  Equity realization simplified formula is:




  Calculating the EqR for each poker hand for every single spot is almost impossible, as it
would essentially require having the solution to the entire game of poker. However, there are a
couple ways you can get very good approximations.


  ♦ You can use empirical data by taking a sample of millions of hands played in online
    games to compare their equity to the fraction of the pot they capture in every spot.

  ♦ You can use modern solvers to obtain the EqR of each hand in various spots and average
    the results.

Equity Realization Heatmaps
The following equity realization heatmaps (Heatmaps 1-4) were generated by Pio Solver. They
show results for situations where the BB is playing a single raised pot against either an EP or the
BN in short stack and mid stack scenarios and they account for a 12.5% ante.
Heatmap 1: Equity Realization (10-20bb) vs EP
Heatmap 2: Equity Realization (10-20bb) vs BN
Heatmap 3: Equity Realization (30-75bb) vs EP
Heatmap 4: Equity Realization (30-75bb) vs BN
  Going back to the example with 95o, input the EqR factor from heatmap number 3 into the EV
equation:




  This shows that calling with 9♣5♦ has a negative expectation and therefore should be folded
(despite the fact that it has enough raw equity to justify calling).
  Another way to tackle this problem is to start by finding out how much equity the hand 9♣5♦
needs to realize for the call to break even:




  9♣5♦ has an EqR factor of 58%, which is 3% lower than the minimum 61%.That means that
even if we have a lot of equity, we just can’t realize enough of it post-flop to make this call
profitable.


Elements that Affect Hand Playability
Position

The importance of position is something that almost all poker players understand to at least some
extent. Ever since they began playing, they have been told to avoid playing out of position and
how playing in position is a lot easier, but what they are not told is why having position is so
important.
   When you are in position, you have the advantage of acting last on every street for the rest of
the hand, which means you get to see what you opponent does and can react accordingly. Most
importantly, if your opponent checks to you, you can check behind and are guaranteed a free
card, which makes a huge difference in terms of realizing equity IP compared to OOP. After
checking OOP, you will often face a bet and be forced to fold, denying your equity in the pot.

Hand Strength

If a hand has a lot of raw equity, equity realization becomes less of an issue because high equity
hands are happy, in most circumstances, to play big pots. They also provide a lot of flexibility
because you can either call or raise with them.
   Very low equity hands are also easy to play because, most of the time, the correct play is to
just fold.
  Medium strength hands are the truly difficult ones to play, because they desperately want to
get to showdown or see free cards but struggle to continue if the opponent applies a lot of
pressure.

Hand Suitedness

On average, suited hands realize 16% more equity than offsuit hands due to having access to
both front and backdoor flush draws. This gives them a lot of flexibility to either semi-bluff more
effectively or call bets with higher implied odds.

Hand Connectedness

Offsuit hands with no connectivity, such as Q2o, are among the lowest EqR hands. They are
incredibly difficult to play because they flop either high pairs with no kicker or low pairs and
their drawing capabilities are limited. Therefore, realizing equity with them is quite difficult.

Range Advantage

Having the range vs range equity advantage can help the weaker hands in your range realize their
equity because, if your range is strong compared to your opponent’s, they simply cannot bet too
aggressively. This allows the weaker hands in your range, that would struggle to withstand a bet,
to see more free cards.
Stack to Pot Ratio (SPR)

SPR is the effective stack size divided by the size of the pot:




   Knowing how big your stack is relative to the pot is crucial. It allows you to plan ahead and
tailor your bet sizes to put yourself in a favorable SPR situation according to the ranges in play.
Table 8 shows typical SPR in MTTs with a 12.5% ante.




                         Table 8: Typical SPR in MTTs with 12.5% Ante

General SPR Guidelines
  ♦ Low SPR (0-5): Hands that can flop made hands such as top pairs and overpairs do better
    in low SPR pots than speculative hands that tend have difficulty realizing their equity due
    to the lack of fold equity and lower implied odds.

  ♦ Medium SPR (6-11): The value of top pair type hands becomes demoted and the value of
    speculative hands increases. The equity realization of hands starts to revolve more around
    suitedness and connectedness than high card value.

  ♦ High SPR (11+): As stacks get deeper and deeper, more of a hand’s value comes from its
    potential to make the nuts (nuttiness). Hands such as sets, nut draws, high flushes and
    straights, that offer the possibility of coolering your opponent, increase in value. Single
    pair type hands will struggle to get to showdown in large pots unless they have some sort
    of backup equity.


Range Morphology
Hand ranges can be categorized according to their equity distribution vs the opponent’s range.

Linear Range

A linear range is composed of the highest equity hands without gaps in between. Here is an
example (Hand Range 13).

Polarized Range

A polarized range consists of high equity value hands and low equity bluffing hands. A range is
said to be perfectly polarized if it consists of only nuts and bluffs, with no hands in between.
Here is an example (Hand Range 14).
Hand Range 13: Hands with at Least 60% Equity Versus a Random Hand
   Hand Range 14: Hands with Over 65% or Less Than 40% Equity Versus a Random Hand

Depolarized/Condensed Range

A condensed or depolarized range is the opposite of a polar range. It has the top and bottom
hands removed and is comprised of middle equity hands. An example is seen in Hand Range 15.
Capped/Uncapped Range

When a range is missing the strongest hands (the top end), it is said to be capped. Conversely, if
the range has all strong hands in it, it is said to be uncapped.


Example
Game: $215 9-max online MTT
Stacks: BN 25bb, BB 15bb
Players: 9 (12.5% ante)
Pre-flop: (2.625bb) BN raises to 2bb, SB folds and the BB calls.
Flop: (5.625bb) A♥J♦T♠ [2 players]

  On the A♥J♦T♠ flop, the BB range (Hand Range 16) lacks all nut hands such as straights
(KQ), sets (AA, JJ, TT), and most two pairs (AJ-AT), so this range is said to be capped.
Conversely the BN range (Hand Range 17) is uncapped because it has all of those hands in its
range.
Hand Range 15: Hands with Between 40% and 65% Equity Versus a Random Hand
Hand Range 16: A Capped Range
                             Hand Range 17: An Uncapped Range

   A condensed range is capped, but a capped range isn’t necessarily condensed. For example, if
the flop were 5♥4♦3♠, then the big blind range would be condensed but would contain very
strong hands such as straights and two pairs, so it wouldn’t be capped.
    Caveat: In real poker games, ranges are rarely perfectly polar, perfectly linear, or any
  other precise category. In most situations, they will be a mix of the various range types.




02




THE ELEMENTS OF
GAME THEORY

The Core Concepts
The following are important concepts that will be used throughout this book when discussing
game theory.


Game Theory: A whole field of math and science that studies mathematical models of conflict
or cooperation between intelligent, rational decision makers. It can be applied to economics,
military tactics, politics, psychology, biology, computer science, and card games like poker.
Game: Any interaction between multiple people called players in which each player’s payoff is
affected by the decisions made by others.
Utility: The overall measure of happiness players get from specific outcomes. Higher utility
numbers imply that the outcome is preferred.
Zero-Sum Game: A mathematical representation of a situation in which a participant’s gain or
loss in utility is exactly balanced by the losses or gains of the other participants. If the total gains
of the participants are added up and the total losses are subtracted, they will sum to zero. (Poker
is a zero-sum game if we neglect rake and ICM [Independent Chip Model] used at tournament
final tables and SNGs; this will be studied later in the book.)
Strategy: A full specification of a player’s behavior, describing each action a player would take
at every possible decision point throughout the game.
Pure Strategy: A strategy in which the same action is always taken at the same decision point.
Mixed Strategy: A strategy that involves playing more than one pure strategy some frequency
of the time at the same decision point.
Dominant Strategy: When one strategy yields a higher payoff than some other strategy,
regardless of which strategy the other players choose. A strategy is dominated if, regardless of
what any other players do, the strategy earns a player a smaller payoff than some other strategy.

  For two different strategies A and B.


  ♦ B strictly dominates A if choosing B always gives a better outcome than choosing A, no
    matter what the other player(s) do.

  ♦ B weakly dominates A if there is at least one set of opponents’ actions for which B is
    superior than A, and all other sets of opponents’ actions give B the same payoff as A.

  ♦ B is strictly dominated by A if choosing B always gives a worse outcome than choosing
    A, no matter what the other player(s) do.

  ♦ B is weakly dominated by A if there is at least one set of opponents’ actions for which B
    gives a worse outcome than A, while all other sets of opponents’ actions give A the same
    payoff as B.

  ♦ B and A are intransitive if B neither dominates A, nor is dominated by A. Choosing A is
    better in some cases, while choosing B is better in other cases, depending on the
    opponents’ actions.



Maximally Exploitative Strategy
A Maximally Exploitative strategy is the most profitable response (set of actions) to an
opponent’s fixed strategy. To calculate an MES you must know the opponent’s full strategy. You
can find an MES by finding the most profitable way to play each particular hand individually.
Once that is known, the value of the whole game is the aggregate of the EV of each individual
hand.
  If you figure out the most profitable play with each one of the 1,326 Hold’em hand
combinations, you have found the MES. Since each hand is always played in the most profitable
way, for a hand to be played in two or more different ways (mixed strategy), the EV of each
action must be the same. Consider the following simplified poker situation.


Example
Game: Heads-Up Sit N’ Go (Players can only push or fold)
BN Stack: 100 chips
BB Stack: 100 chips
Blinds: (5/10)
Pre-flop: BN is playing a strategy where he goes all-in with all of his hands. What is the BB’s
MES vs the BN?

  Using the pot odds formula:




   BB can call all hands that have at least 45% equity vs Villain’s range, so BB’s MES vs BN is
to call 66.21% hands and fold 33.79% (Hand Range 18).
                   Hand Range 18: A Calling Range with at Least 45% Equity

   Each hand EV calculation is done independently, so all hands that are +EV calls on their own
are called and all hands that are -EV are folded. There is no such thing as “loss leader” type plays
where one hand is played less profitably than it should for the sake of the whole strategy,
“balance”, or protecting one’s range. Each hand is either profitable or it is not and should be
played accordingly.
   The aggregate EV of BB’s MES (calling all +EV hands and folding all -EV hands) weighted
to each hand combinations frequency is 13.77 chips from a 15 chip pot, this being 92% of the pot
(Hand Range 19).




                            Hand Range 19: Calculating BB’s MES
  The aggregate EV of BN’s exploitative strategy (moving all-in with 100% hands) is: 1.2228
chips from a 15 chip pot, this being 8% of the pot (Hand Range 20).



Counter Exploitation
MES is calculated vs an opponent’s fixed strategy, but an adaptive opponent can modify their
strategy to a new strategy that is in turn maximally exploitative vs your own MES, improving
their expectation.
                 Hand Range 20: Aggregate EV of BN’s Exploitative Strategy


Example
Consider the previous example, where the BN played a strategy that consisted of simply going
all-in with all hands for 10bb. The BB’s MES was to call 66.21% hands and fold the other
33.79% of hands. If the BN knows the BB’s calling strategy, they can adjust their pushing
strategy to maximally exploit the BB.
   We can find which BN hands are +EV shoves by applying our EV equation to each hand:




  Calculating all hands EV by hand can be very time consuming, so we can also use a push/fold
app like Hold’em Resources Calculator (HRC) (holdemresources.net).
  Second Iteration: BN counter exploit is to shove 46.61% of hands and fold 53.39% of hands
(Hand Range 21).
  Next, the BB can also change strategy to find the best response vs the new BN strategy.
  Third Iteration: BB best response is to call 30.3% of hands and fold 69.7% of hands (Hand
Range 22).
Hand Range 21: The BN Counter-exploit
                             Hand Range 22: BB Best Response

   If this process of both players counter-adjusting continues for a large enough number of
iterations, eventually the players will reach an equilibrium point where neither can improve
upon the strategy they are already playing. At this point it can be said that both players are
maximally exploiting each other. This situation is called Nash Equilibrium.
   It may also occur that the players’ strategies alternate back and forth and never converge to an
equilibrium. In this case, the equilibrium can still be found by making slight changes in the
players’ response. Instead of switching all the way to the best response on each iteration, each
player can adjust their strategy one step at the time in that direction.



The Nash Equilibrium
In the poker world, GTO (Game Theory Optimal) is often used as a synonym for Nash
Equilibrium.
  Nash Equilibrium is a set of strategies where:


  ♦ Players are clairvoyant: each player knows every other player’s exact strategy.

  ♦ All players are maximally exploiting each other simultaneously.

  ♦ No player can unilaterally change their strategy to improve their own expectation.


  Equilibrium strategies are maximally exploitative when played vs an unexploitable opponent,
so they inherit all the properties of MES, which are:


  ♦ Individual hands are always played in the most profitable way possible, and so GTO play
     never involves playing a hand less profitably than it should be played for the sake of
     balance.

  ♦ Strictly dominated strategies cannot be a part of a Nash Equilibrium, as it is irrational for
    any player to use them.

  ♦ The only way a hand can be played in more than one way at the equilibrium (mixed
    strategy) is if multiple strategic choices have the same EV.

  The following are Nash Equilibrium solutions (generated with HRC) for the previous example
when playing heads-up with 10bb stacks where pushing and folding are the only options (Hand
Ranges 23 and 24).
Hand Range 23: BN Nash Equilibrium
                           Hand Range 24: BB Nash Equilibrium

The value of the push/fold game for both players across the different iterations (Table 9).
                           Table 9: Iterations of the Push/Fold Game

   In the push/fold example, if the BB knew that the BN was on the first iteration (where they
would just push with 100% range), BB could improve their EV to 13.77 by applying the MES
strategy of calling 66.21% of hands. But if the BB is wrong about the BN’s play, or if the BN
outthinks the BB and plays the second iteration strategy (push 46.61%) instead, then BB’s EV
would actually go down to 8.48. If the BB plays the GTO strategy of calling 37.4% vs a BN
push, their EV is guaranteed to be 10.45, no matter what the BN does.

     One of the main reasons Nash Equilibrium or GTO strategies are powerful is that they
  give you a guaranteed minimum EV. The way they are defined, they assume your opponent
  knows your strategy and that their strategy is the absolute best response to what you are
  doing. This is why GTO strategies are referred to as unexploitable. It is mathematically
  impossible for any opponent to gain an edge on you, meaning you will either break even or
  profit.

   Another advantage of playing the equilibrium strategy is that you don’t have to try to trick
your opponents by getting into crazy leveling wars. GTO strategies, by definition, don’t make
specific plays vs specific types of opponents. They assume your opponent will correctly adjust to
whatever you do and thus they focus more on playing solid poker rather than constantly trying to
get inside your opponents’ heads.
   If you play GTO against any opponent who is not perfectly countering your strategy (also
playing GTO), your expectation will be greater than at equilibrium and will increase as your
opponent’s strategy gets worse. However, equilibrium strategies won’t earn you as much EV as a
strategy that is perfectly designed to counter the specific mistakes of your opponents. Top
players develop sound baseline GTO strategies so they remain unexploitable vs tough or
unknown opponents, but they also have the ability to take advantage of their opponent’s leaks by
making exploitative adjustments as they learn more about their opponent’s play.



The Indifference Principle
The indifference principle was defined very accurately by Will Tipton in his excellent book
Expert Heads Up No Limit Hold’em, Volume 1: Optimal and Exploitative Strategies (D&B
Publishing):

    “Equilibrium strategies are, by definition, maximally exploitative strategies when facing
  an opponent who is playing his own GTO strategy – in this case, every hand is played as
  profitably as possible. So, the only way a hand can be played in two different ways at the
  equilibrium is if both of those actions have exactly the same EV; that is, if the player is
  indifferent to his choice of actions. This is known as the Indifference Principle: if a player
  plays a mixed strategy with a hand at the equilibrium, then it must be that all of the actions
  he takes with a nonzero frequency have the same EV. This is a powerful statement, because
  it tells us something about the GTO strategy of the player’s opponent. If a player is
  indifferent between two options, it must be that his opponent is playing in such a way as to a
  make him so.”

   This principle is intimately connected with the idea of balance. Think back to our previous
example where we know that BN’s GTO push range is 58.3% of hands. The reason they can’t go
all-in with a larger percentage of hands is because BB is calling enough so that the BN can’t
profit with the bottom of their pushing range (43s). If they could push and profit with the bottom
of their range, the BN would just keep profitably adding hands to their pushing range. At the
same time, if the BN was losing money pushing 43s, they would choose not to do so and another
hand would become the new bottom of their range. So, the BB must call the exact amount that
makes the worst hand in BN shoving range break even or, in other words, indifferent to pushing
or folding. Since 43s is indifferent to pushing or folding, it is played with a mixed strategy: 74%-
push, 26%-fold. If the BN pushes 43s more than 74%, BB could exploit by calling more hands,
making 43s a -EV Push.
    At the same time, in equilibrium, the BB can only profitably call 37.4% of hands. The bottom
of their calling range, Q6s, is breaking even and is also played with a mixed strategy: call-39%,
fold-61%. If the BB calls Q6s more than 61% of the time, the BN could exploit by jamming a
little bit tighter, making Q6s a -EV Call.



The Clairvoyance Toy Game
Consider the following simplified poker situation:


Example
Two Players: P1 and P2
Pot: $100
Effective Stack: $100
Street: River
P1 Range: A♠A♥, Q♣Q♦
P2 Range: K♣K♦
Board: 3♠3♥3♣2♦2♠
P1: Out of Position
P2: In Position
Both players are clairvoyant: They both know each other’s strategy.
What is the value of the game for each player?

   In this set up, P1 has a polarized range. AA represents the nuts and QQ represents air because
it cannot win at showdown against P2’s condensed range of KK, which is a bluff-catcher.
   What is each player’s range vs range equity?

  P1 wins the pot half the time when holding AA and loses half the time when holding QQ.
Thus each player’s equity in this pot is 50%.
  If each player’s equity is 50%, and the pot is $100, what is the player’s EV?
  Remember that equity alone does not account for post-flop play so, even if both players have
50% equity, that doesn’t necessarily mean that they will capture 50% of the pot.
  As we will see after solving this toy game, the EV of P1 is in fact $75 and the EV of P2 is only
$25, even if both players play perfectly!


Eliminating Dominated Strategies
Fold AA vs a bet

AA always wins, so the EV of calling a bet of any size with AA is:




  Folding the nuts is clearly a dominated strategy that should never be used.
Calling a Bet with QQ




  QQ can never win at showdown vs KK. So, the EV of calling a bet of any size with QQ is:




 Calling a bet with a hand that cannot win is a dominated strategy, thus P1 should always fold
QQ to a bet of any size because calling loses whatever the bet amount is.

Betting or Raising KK

Since P1 never folds AA and never calls a bet with QQ, betting KK doesn’t accomplish
anything. Betting loses more money when P1 holds AA, thus betting KK is a dominated strategy
that should never be used.

Checking with AA

We know that P2 never bets with KK, so if P1 checks AA, P2 will just check back and P1 will
never win an extra bet, so P1 should always bet AA.
  After eliminating all dominated strategies, the game can be reduced to the next set of
questions:


  ♦ What is the optimal bet-size for P1?

  ♦ How often does P1 bluff with QQ?

  ♦ How often does P2 call with KK?

  ♦ What happens if player’s positions are reversed?


  P1’s optimal bet-size is to go all-in. We will demonstrate this later but, for now, let’s have
P1’s only bet-size to be all-in.


Ruling Out Pure Strategies
We know that P1 should always bet with AA, but what about QQ? Let’s analyse.

Pure Strategy A: P1 Bluffs QQ All the Time

P2’s EV when P1 always bluffs his QQ:




 (P2 wins the pot half the time when P1 is bluffing and loses the pot half the time when P1 has
AA)




  We already know that P2’s EV in this game should be $25, so the P2 strategy of bluffing with
QQ all of the time is suboptimal because it gives P2 a higher payoff ($50) than his real
expectation ($25).

Pure Strategy B: P1 never bluffs QQ

If P1 never bluffs with QQ, P2 has no reason to ever call with KK because he would always lose.
   In that case, P1 would bet his AA and never get called, and whenever he has QQ, the hand will
get checked down and P2’s KK will win at showdown. With this strategy, P2’s EV is:




  Again, this line offers P2 a higher payoff than his real expectation.


Player1 Solution
We know that P2 will never bet KK, so the only way P1 can get value with AA is by betting, but
if P1 never bluffs with QQ, calling with KK would be -EV, meaning P2 should always fold. If
P1 always bluffs with QQ, P2’s call with KK would be +EV, meaning he should always call.
   We need to find P1’s optimal bluffing frequency so that P2 doesn’t make money calling with
KK but, at the same time, doesn’t lose money. In other words, P1 needs to make P2 indifferent to
calling or folding:
  By definition we know that the EV of folding is 0 so,




  Using our EV equation:




For clarity let’s substitute:
%W = W
%L = 1 – W
$W = b + p
$R = b




Where:
b = bet and p = pot
  To be indifferent between calling or folding, P2 has to win with a frequency of:




  This is the exact same number as his pot odds:




   This result shouldn’t be surprising, as P2 wins the pot with the same frequency as P1 bluffs.
We know that on the river, with no more cards to come, the pot odds simply tell a player how
often a call has to be good for it to break even. So, to make P2 indifferent between calling or
folding, P1 must bluff with a frequency equal to P2 pot odds.
   Now all we need is to do is figure out how often P1 has to bet is QQ so that their betting range
is 67% Value and 33% Bluffs.

Player1 Bluff Frequency




Player1 Value Frequency




Player1 Bluff-to-Value Ratio
 Player1 needs to have 1 bluff for every 2 value combos in their betting range, so should bet his
QQ at a frequency of: 1/2 or 50%.

Player1 Total Frequencies

P1 has AA half the time and bets them 100% of the time:




  P1 has QQ half the time and bets them 50% of the time:




Player1 Final EV Numbers
AA EV:




  (The EV of betting AA is $150; this is clearly higher than the EV of checking AA, which is
$100)




QQ EV:




  Then the value of the game for P1 is:
Player2 Solution
We know that P1 always bets with AA, so when they check, they are giving up with QQ. This
means that when P2 sees P1 check, he should check back and win at showdown with KK
because there is no value in betting, as P1 will always fold QQ. To solve the game for P2, all we
need to do is find his strategy and EV when P1 bets.
  If P1 is betting a balanced strategy by bluffing 1/3 of the time (bet AA 100% and QQ 50%)
  P2’s calling EV is:




   If P1 plays their equilibrium strategy, it doesn’t matter if P2 calls or folds because the EV of
both actions is 0. That said, P2 still needs to call at some frequency, otherwise P1 could deviate
from the equilibrium to exploit them by bluffing more often.
   For example, if P2 chooses to never call with KK, P1 could start bluffing with QQ 100% of
the time and win the entire pot. If P2 chooses to always call with KK, then P1 could exploit P2
by no longer bluffing QQ.
  We need to find P2’s optimal calling frequency so P1 doesn’t make money when bluffing with
QQ but doesn’t lose money either. In other words, P2 has to make P1 indifferent to bluffing or
checking with QQ.




  We know that P1’s EV of checking QQ is 0 because he will lose at showdown, so:




  Using our EV formula:




For clarity let’s substitute:
%P2calls = c
%P2folds = 1 – c
EV on fold = p
EV called = –b




Where:
b = bet
p = pot
  This number is known as Minimum Defense Frequency (MDF).




  P2 has to call 50% of the time with KK to make P1 indifferent to bluffing or checking with
QQ. Another way to solve this problem is by asking how often P2 has to fold to make P1
indifferent. We can do this by using our EV formula.




For clarity let’s substitute:
%P2calls = 1 – f
%P2folds = f
EV on fold = p
EV called = –b




  P2 has to fold KK 50% of the time to make P1 indifferent to bluffing or checking with QQ.
  Notice that this result, b/(b + p), is the same as P1’s bluff-to-value ratio.

    This number is also known as Alpha. It represents how often a bluff has to work for it to
  break even. In this case if P1’s bluff with QQ works more than 50% of the time, the bluff
  would be profitable.
  Since folding frequency and calling frequency are complementary numbers, they should add
up to 1. So, if you know one, you can always easily calculate the other.
  P1’s minimum defense frequency can also be calculated as:




     These two results: Alpha and MDF are key GTO concepts and will be revisited
  throughout this book.

Player2 Final EV Numbers




  Since KK always beats QQ at showdown: P2 EQ vs QQ is 100%
  P1 only checks his QQ 50% of the time, so




Full Toy Game Solution Summary

Pot: $100
Stack Depth: $100
Board: 3♠3♥3♣ 2♦ 2♠


Player1: EV $75
AA: Bet $100 (100%), Check (0%)
QQ: Bet $100 (50%), Check (50%)
P1 Total Betting Frequency: 75%
P1 Total Checking Frequency: 25%


Player2: EV: $25
Vs Check: Check KK (100%)
Vs $100 Bet: Call KK (50%), Fold KK (50%)

Decision Tree (at Equilibrium)
  We still have two more questions to answer for a complete solution.

What Happens if the Players’ Positions are Reversed?

In a nuts/air vs bluff catcher situation, position doesn’t matter! If P2 is OOP instead, they still
won’t ever bet with KK because that is a dominated strategy, and so P2’s equilibrium strategy
would be to check 100% to P1.
   In position, P1 still wants to bet AA 100% of the time because checking back is a dominated
strategy, and P1 still wants to bluff with QQ at a frequency of b/(b + p).

What is the Optimal Bet-sizing for Player1?

On the river, if P1’s range is perfectly polar and P2’s Range is condensed, P1’s optimal bet-size
is always all-in! As we can see in Table 10, P1’s EV increases as the bet-size increases. This is
because the bigger the bet-size, the more often P1 can bluff. In this game, P2 only makes money
from the tree branch where P1 checks with QQ, so the less often that branch happens, the less
money P2 will make. Therefore, P1’s EV is maximized when betting as large as possible. If P1
could bet an infinite amount of money, it would result in the capture of 100% of the pot.




                                  Table 10: P1’s EV by Bet Size
Minimum Defense Frequency (MDF)
As seen in the Clairvoyance Toy Game, MDF is related to the alpha number:




  The Alpha number is particularly useful when bluffing because it tells you how often a bluff
with 0% equity has to work for us to break even.


Example
Game: Live Multi-table Tournament
Stacks: SB=50bb, BB=20bb
Players: 9 (12.5% ante)
Pre-flop: (2.625bb) Hero is in the SB with 72o and the action gets folded to him, the BB is a
very tight and straightforward player who doesn’t fight enough for small pots.

   72o is a hand that would normally be folded from the SB vs a strong opponent, but here Hero
thinks BB is only defending ~50.8% hands vs a SB steal (Hand Range 25). You have to
determine if you can profitably attempt to steal the blinds with your weak hand.
                    Hand Range 25: A Tight Defending Range from the BB

   We can use the Alpha equation to find out how often the bet has to work to break even if we
raise 2.5bb from the SB:
  If the bet works more than 43% of the time it will show an immediate profit, and in this case
the BB is folding 49.17%.

  You always fold 72o vs a 3-bet, and let’s also assume you always lose the pot when the BB
calls, which is not true because when called you will still have some equity vs the calling range
(but it is worth looking at the worst-case scenario because, if you can profit then, you will always
profit).
  The steal with 72o yields a profit of 27.4bb/100. This raise is only profitable because Villain
defends the big blind way too tightly, allowing you to exploit by stealing their blind with any two
cards (ATC).
  From the BB’s perspective the defence should be at a frequency of:




   The BB’s minimum defense frequency is 57% hands, but the BB’s GTO solution in this spot
is to defend 82.1% hands (Hand Range 26) which, for many players, sounds crazy. Later in the
book we will study BB defense strategies in depth and understand why this is possible.
                   Hand Range 26: BB vs SB (2.5x Raise) 20bb GTO Defense
                     • 3-bet all-in: 17.9% / • Call: 54.3% / • Fold: 17.9%


Multiway
The Alpha number tells you how often a bet with a 0% equity hand needs to work for you to
break even. However, if there are several opponents still active after the bet, you need to make a
small adjustment to the formula to find out how often you need each Villain to fold individually
to your bet. You do this as follows.
  Where opponents are the remaining players to act after you.


Example
Game: Online Cash Game
Stacks: BB=99bb, SB=220bb, BN=114bb
Blinds: $1/$2
Players: 6 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) The action gets folded to Hero on the BN. How often do each one of the
players in the blinds fold to a 2.5bb raise for Hero to have a profitable open with any two cards
(ATC)?

  We can start by calculating Alpha:




  In total, Hero needs the raise to work 62.5% of the time to break even. To find out how often
each Villain should fold individually, all you need to do is calculate the square root of Alpha:
  So, if each Villain folds more than 79% of the time to a BN steal, Hero has a profitable raise
with ATC.

  Alpha vs one player is given by




  For three players you calculate:




  and for four:




  etc.

  Each player’s minimum defense frequency can be calculated as:




   In this example, each player should defend at least (1 – 0.79) = 21% of the time to stop Hero
from automatically profiting by raising ATC on the BN.
   Let’s consider a small adjustment to this example. Suppose Hero looks at the HUD (heads-up
display) and the statistics on the Villains are:
  Can Hero profit by raising ATC on the BN vs these two Villains?

   In this case you already know each Villain’s individual fold vs a BN steal frequency. If each
player was folding at least 79%, solving this example would be trivial since both players would
be folding frequently enough.
   How can you know if Hero can profit by raising ATC on the BN vs these two Villains?
   You can solve this by finding the combined fold to steal frequency of both players:




  Combined, these two players are folding 60% of the time and Alpha is 62.5%, so even though
both players fold to BN steal is very high, Hero doesn’t have a profitable BN steal with ATC
(assuming Hero has 0% equity when called).
   If you know each player’s individual folding frequency, you can calculate their combined
folding frequency by multiplying them together.
   Assuming your bluffs have no equity, this formula works for any number of opponents and
even for post-flop situations such as when discussing continuation bets.



Exploitative Play vs GTO
There are two possible types of exploitation: passive and active. Active exploitation further
breaks down into maximal and minimal.


Passive Exploitation
Does GTO Play Make Money vs Bad Players?

It should be clear by now that in a heads-up situation, if one player is playing optimally vs a
suboptimal opponent then any deviation the weaker player makes away from GTO to a worse
strategy can never increase their value, but it can cost them value, which will in turn be gained
by the GTO player. This phenomenon is called passive exploitation because the optimal player
does not have to do anything besides play an equilibrium strategy to gain EV from the
suboptimal player. In a sense the weaker player is self-exploiting by playing poorly.


Active Exploitation
Active exploitation happens whenever a player deviates from their core strategy to further take
advantage of an opponent’s leak.


  ♦ A player who always plays Equilibrium Strategy is called a GTO player.

  ♦ A player who employs a Maximally Exploitative Strategy is called a Maximally
    Exploitative Player.

  ♦ A player who employs a Minimally Exploitative Strategy is called a Minimally
    Exploitative Player.


  In general, when players talk about an exploitative player they are referring to a maximally
exploitative player.


Maximally Exploitative Strategy (MES)
As explained earlier, MES happens when a player chooses to deviate from equilibrium to a
strategy that maximizes EV vs a Villain’s suboptimal strategy (obviously, this is only possible if
the Villain isn’t playing GTO). Consider the following simplified poker situation:


Example
Game: Heads-Up Sit N’ Go (Players can only push or fold)
Effective Stack: 15bb
Blinds: 0.5bb/1bb
Pre-flop: Hero is in the SB. His GTO strategy is to push 45.7% of hands.

  Let’s imagine eight different types of Villain that Hero might encounter in a heads-up match:
  ♦ GTO Player: This player will call a 15bb SB push optimally with a 28.5% range.

  ♦ 10% Loose Player: This type of Villain is a bit sticky and calls a 15bb SB push with a
    31.4% range.

  ♦ 25% Loose Player: This type of Villain is a bit stickier and calls a 15bb SB push with a
    35.6% range.

  ♦ 100% Loose Player: This type of Villain really hates folding and calls a 15bb SB push
    with a 57% range.

  ♦ 10% Tight Player: This type of Villain is a tighter and calls a 15bb SB push with a
    25.7% range.

  ♦ 25% Tight Player: This type of Villain is a lot tighter and calls a 15bb SB push with a
    21.4% range.

  ♦ 50% Tight Player: This type of Villain is a massive nit and calls a 15bb SB push with a
    14.3% range.


   In Table 11, we summarize the SB EV gains of playing GTO and MES vs the various
opponents, as well as Hero’s potential EV loss if Villain plays GTO, instead of the suboptimal
strategy, or counter-exploits Hero.
                  Table 11: EV Gains and Loses Versus Different Villain Types

  As seen in Table 11, GTO play can’t lose or win EV vs a GTO player, but it gains EV vs
suboptimal players depending on the severity of their leaks. MES on average gains 6.4bb/100
more than GTO vs suboptimal players but doing so creates a leak that can, on average, be
counter-exploited for -15.62 bb/100.
  Even vs an extremely bad opponent who is calling 2x more often than they should, MES only
captures 6.3bb/100 more than GTO and can be exploited back for -2.5bb/100. If the Villain is
calling 50% tighter than they should, MES does very well, yielding 24.6bb/100 more than GTO,
but can in turn be counter-exploited by -62.4bb/100. Additionally, the strategy shift is extreme as
Hero is now shoving 100% hands instead of 28%, so this exploitative adjustment can easily be
spotted by an observant Villain.
   MES involves a degree of risk, because you are putting yourself in a situation where your
opponent could counter-exploit your new strategy to an even greater margin than you were trying
to exploit them in the first place, if they figure out what you are doing. Also, if you are wrong
with your assessment of Villain’s play (which is inevitable from time to time) and adjust
incorrectly, you will be the one deviating to a weaker strategy that will in turn lose value. Thus
you must be very careful and have a high degree of certainty in your reads if you are aiming for
maximum exploitation.


Minimally Exploitative Strategy (MinES)
Let’s return to the Clairvoyance Toy game solution.


Pot: $100
Stacks: $100
Board: 3♠3♥3♣2♦2♠


Player1: EV $75
AA: Bet $100 (100%), Check (0%)
QQ: Bet $100 (50%), Check (50%)


Player2: EV $25
Vs Check: Check KK (100%)
Vs $100 Bet: Call KK (50%), Fold KK (50%)
  Imagine a variation of this game where Hero is Player1 and Player2 is a Villain who tends to
call slightly loose. Instead of calling 50% with KK, they call 55%.
  If Hero keeps playing GTO strategy, he will not earn any extra EV vs this leak.


AA EV:




QQ EV:




  Then, the value of the game for P1 is:
   This is the same EV as seen previously.
   If Hero implements the maximally exploitative strategy vs this Villain, he should bluff 0% of
the time. If he only value-bets, his EV would be:




  And he never bluffs with QQ, so:




   The MES yields $2.5 per hand more than GTO and so, in theory, Hero should just keep
pounding on Villain. However, from Villain’s perspective, he has seen Hero bet the river only
50% of the time instead of 75% and, every time he calls, he gets shown AA. Hero’s assumption
is that Villain is calling slightly looser than he should, not that he is stupid. Even if he is very
slow to catch on, there is no reason to think he won’t adapt as soon as he realizes that Hero is
never bluffing.
   If Villain counter-exploits Hero by switching to a strategy of always folding to his all-in, his
EV becomes:




   This is 2x more than equilibrium per hand and 10x the amount Hero was exploiting the Villain
for! So, Hero should be able to exploit Villain at least 10 times in a row before he catches on to
Hero’s strategy and adjusts, otherwise Hero will lose money. If Villain counter-exploits Hero
even 2 out of 10 times, Hero would still lose $30, or -$3/hand, compared to GTO. If the Villain
was particularly slow catching on and allows Hero to keep exploiting him for 45 hands in a row,
and only adjusts for the final 5 hands, then Hero’s EV over 50 hands would be -$12.5 compared
to simply playing GTO.




   Unless your opponent is completely oblivious to your play, you can’t expect them to ignore
your betting frequency when you are obviously playing MES and being completely unbalanced.
Assuming they are intelligent and capable of adjusting to your play, how do you take advantage
of their leak in a way that doesn’t leave you open to massive counter-exploitation?
   You can build their leak into the structure of the game. A perfect poker player’s utility
function would be equal to their EV, but most players’ decisions get affected by different factors
such as the fear of losing money, looking stupid, or the embarrassment of being bluffed, and
those psychological traits will slightly tilt decisions in one way or another, decreasing a player’s
EV.


P1 EV:




  Where: C = probability of P2 calling
P2 EV:




Where:
AA% = probability of P1 having AA
QQ% = probability of P1 having QQ




  At equilibrium P1 must be indifferent to betting or checking with QQ:




  P2 should also be indifferent to calling or folding with KK and, as we proved before, P1 will
always bet his AA, so:
  AA% = 1
  Then:




  To build Villain’s leak into the game, we must see it from Villain’s perspective. In Villain’s
mind, folding KK when Hero is bluffing is a -EV play by a margin of X and Hero gains that
extra X when his bluff succeeds:


P1 EV:




P2 EV:




  If we apply the indifference principle one more time we get:
And also:




We know that Villain’s calling frequency is 55%, so:
Then:




Now that we know X, we can use it to find Hero’s betting frequency with QQ:
What is Hero’s EV using the new QQ betting frequency of 45% in the real game where x=0?
The AA EV is still $155, so all we need to do is recalculate QQ [EV]:




Then:
                         Table 12: Comparing MinES EV and MES EV

   Of course, the MinES EV gain is not nearly as good as the MES EV gain (Table 12) but the
extra $0.25 per hand, or $25/100 that MinES yields, is unexploitable and there is nothing Villain
can do to prevent you from getting that edge unless he fixes his leak by internally reducing his
value of X.
   MinES can be calculated using modern GTO solvers, and unlike MES you don’t need to know
Villain’s entire strategy. All you need is to assume a specific leak, lock that leak in Villain’s
strategy in the solver (allow Villain to play optimally everywhere else) and try to compensate for
the observed leak later on. This way, the solver will produce an exploitative solution accounting
for the leak but also for the best possible counter-adjustments that Villain can make. By doing so,
you will yield a lower EV than MES while protecting yourself from counter-exploitation. Also,
MinES adjustments are small and more difficult to spot by the Villain, so you can keep
exploiting them far longer before they realize what you are doing if they are even capable of
doing so. Finally, in the event Villain reverts to the real equilibrium, you must do so as well,
otherwise you would start losing EV.

The Two sub-types of MinES


  ♦ Reactive MinES: This type of exploitation adjusts your strategy only after you have
    observed the leak happen in the actual hand. For example, if you knew Villain overfolds
    to c-bets, you would c-bet with an equilibrium strategy and then adjust the turn and river
     play to account for a stronger Villain range on the later streets.

  ♦ Proactive MinES: This type of exploitation adjusts your strategy even before your
    opponent makes the mistake because you assume beforehand that they will commit the
    mistake. For example, if you knew Villain overfolds to flop c-bets, you can increase your
    c-bet frequency to exploit the leak.


  I recommend using both reactive and proactive MinES. For example, vs a player who
overfolds the flop vs c-bets, you should increase your c-bet frequency and then, if called, adjust
your turn and river play to account for your own range being wider than normal and Villain’s
range being tighter than normal.
  We will see more practical examples when studying post-flop play.



GTO in Multi-way Situations
The definition of Nash Equilibrium states that:

     “No player can unilaterally change his strategy to improve his own expectation.”

   In any heads-up situation, Nash Equilibrium is very powerful because it means that a player
playing GTO cannot be beaten. It is mathematically impossible even if your opponent knew your
exact strategy. You are guaranteed a certain EV no matter what your opponent does. If you are
playing GTO and your opponent deviates to a weaker strategy, their EV can only go down and,
since poker is a zero sum game, that EV will be gained by you.
   Fortunately, Nash Equilibrium principles are not limited to heads-up poker. They can also be
applied to any poker situation once there are only two players remaining in the pot.
   Let’s look at some examples of common poker situations that can be considered heads-up
subgames:


  ♦ 6-max cash game: CO raises, the BN 3-bets, the blinds fold and the action gets back to the
    CO. The only players remaining are BN and CO.

  ♦ MTT 9-max: UTG raises and the action folds to the BB. The only players remaining are
    UTG and BB.

  ♦ MTT 6-max: HJ raises, BN calls, SB 3-bets, HJ Folds and the action gets back to the BN.
     The only players remaining are SB and BN.

   That’s great! GTO play guarantees unbeatability in any poker hand from the point where there
are only two players left, but what about situations where there are three or more active players?
   In multi-way situations, the EV loss by one player’s mistakes are not spread equally among
the other players in the hand. In most situations, some players will be able to capitalize more on
the mistakes than others, depending on many factors such as stack depth and position.
Furthermore, some players might end up losing EV even if they play their equilibrium strategies.
Consider the following:


Example
Game: $100 3-max online Jackpot Sit & Go
Stacks: BN 12bb, SB 12bb, BB 12bb
Players: 3 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) BN push 12 BB, Hero is in the SB.

   The Nash Equilibrium strategy for the BN is to push 32.1% hands. If we introduce a fishy
player to the game who only pushes 16%, we can use a push-fold calculator to get the players’
change in EV if the blinds continue playing Nash Equilibrium and if they adjust to the MES
(Table 13).




                                  Table 13: MES Adjustments

   The fish is deviating to a weaker strategy and, of course, that makes them lose EV, but their
mistake also makes Hero lose EV (-4.5bb/100) if Hero keeps playing GTO. Even if Hero adjusts
to MES, Hero will still lose 3.2bb/100 more compared to when all players are playing Nash
Equilibrium.
   The BB is the biggest winner in this situation as they are capturing all the extra EV. However,
if we consider future games then, on average, Hero will be in the BB as often as in the SB.
Therefore, Hero will also be able to profit from this fishy player’s leak.
Conclusion
Having a sound GTO core strategy and developing a deep understanding of GTO principles is
the key to beating modern poker and absolutely vital in tough games.

     However, GTO isn’t meant to replace critical thinking. Regardless of how good any GTO
  strategy might be, players should always be aware of the opposition and be actively
  thinking about every action throughout the hand.

   Even in heads-up pots where playing GTO guarantees unbeatability, players can still make
exploitative adjustments to further capitalize on their opponent’s mistakes. For multi-way
situations, GTO offers near-unexploitable strategies that can be used as a starting point but are by
no means the final answer and should not be followed blindly. Understanding and incorporating
GTO concepts will improve your strategy and make you a lot tougher to play against, as well as
help you better exploit your opponents’ weaknesses. GTO is a powerful tool in a poker player’s
arsenal but should not be the only one.


Poker Math Everyone Should Know
Normalizing the size of the pot to 1 and all bets as a fraction of the pot makes calculations easier.
For example, if the pot is $60 and a player bets $20, his bet-size as a fraction of the pot is 1/3-pot
or 0.33 pot (Table 14).
                                Table 14: Bet-sizing and Alpha


Example
If you bet half-pot with a polarized range on the river, you are giving your opponent 25% odds to
call (3-to-1). Your range should have 75% value-bets and 25% bluffs (3-to-1). Your bet needs to
work 33% (Alpha) of the time to instantly profit. Your opponent must defend 67% (1-Alpha) of
his range to make your zero equity bluffs indifferent.




03
MODERN POKER
SOFTWARE
Computer programs and apps have taken over modern society. Now you can find apps that do
pretty much anything, including gaming, social media, communication, fitness, health, yoga,
meditation, cooking, learning new languages, playing music and videos and even dating! No
matter your need, there is a good chance that you can find an app that can fulfill it and if you
can’t, you can be sure that there is someone somewhere in the world developing it right now.
  The world we live in has changed, and with it so has poker as we knew it. As technology
progresses, the tools used by poker players to analyze and study the game have become more and
more sophisticated. In this chapter we will analyze some of the most important programs and
applications used by poker players to improve their strategies, keep up with modern
developments, and crush their opponents.



Equity Calculators
Poker equity calculators have been around forever, and they are undoubtedly the most essential
tool in any serious player’s arsenal. Understanding how equities interact for hand vs hand, hand
vs range and range vs range is the first step towards a successful poker career.
  Equity calculators have come a long way since 2008 when the now deprecated PokerStove
was first released. Back then, the calculators were unpolished and offered extremely limited
functionality. Now, equity calculators such as Power Equilab (power-equilab.com) offer a wide
variety of features that go beyond simple equity calculations, including equity graphs, heatmaps,
range analysis and more.


Pros

  ♦ The process of entering ranges and calculating equities is intuitive and simple to use

  ♦ Multiway equity calculations

  ♦ Ability to create custom playability profiles

  ♦ Fast equity calculations
Cons
  ♦ Calculations are limited to equity and simple math

  ♦ Does not report EV or any kind of strategic advice

  ♦ Limited post-flop range analysis



Range Analysis Tools
With a range analysis tool such as Flopzilla (flopzilla.com) players can input hand ranges and
figure out how the range interacts with any possible flop, breaking it down into hand categories
such as top pair, sets, straights, flush draws, backdoor straight draws, and many more.


Pros
  ♦ Reports equity by hand combos

  ♦ Can be used to analyze card removal effects

  ♦ Post-flop filtering of hands by category across turns and rivers

  ♦ Fast calculations

  ♦ Simple to use


Cons
  ♦ Does not report EV or any sort of strategic advice

  ♦ Cannot be used to create complex decision trees

  ♦ Mostly useful for heads-up analysis

  ♦ Limited pre-flop usefulness



EV Decision Trees
With an EV decision tree tool such as Card Runners EV (cardrunnersev.com) you can build
decision trees that represent player actions and calculate the EV of every decision point.


Pros
  ♦ Reports EQ and EV for different actions

  ♦ ICM calculations that are useful for SNG and MTT final tables

  ♦ Ability to create complex trees and scripting functionality (use of a programming
    language to automate tasks)

  ♦ Multiway calculations

  ♦ Useful for pre-flop and post-flop range analysis

  ♦ Comprehensive range filtering tool

  ♦ MES calculations

  ♦ Can incorporate bounties and rake into the calculations

  ♦ Accounts for card removal and bunching effects


Cons
  ♦ Requires a significant degree of user input, including player ranges at every decision
    point, pot size, bet-sizes, raise sizes, and stack depths

  ♦ Tree creation and strategy analysis can be very time consuming

  ♦ Requires knowledge of Villain’s full strategy or the use of several assumptions to
    compute EV

  ♦ Steep learning curve



Pre-flop Nash Calculators
Before modern GTO solvers, Nash calculators such as Holdem Resources Calculator
(holdemresources.net) were the tool of choice for MTT and SNG players. They are great at
approximating pre-flop push/fold strategies, particularly for shallow stacks in situations where
players don’t have calling ranges.
   However, they do not support post-flop play, so if you try to calculate ranges for stacks that
are deep enough to have non-all-in bet-sizes, you would be forced to apply action abstractions.
You can either completely remove players’ options to call non-all-in raises, or allow for calls, but
assume no more betting will happen after the flop is dealt, having both players check their hands
down. Both abstractions produce incorrect pre-flop strategies. Removing the calling option hurts
the defending players by forcing them to play tighter ranges, so the calculator suggests wider
opening ranges than optimal and is more biased towards having good blockers, while ignoring
post-flop playability. Checking down post-flop benefits the calling player because all of their
marginal hands will realize 100% of their equity, which leads to wider calling ranges than
optimal. Both options limit Nash calculators’ applications for deep stack poker and make them
suitable for only push/fold situations.


Pros
  ♦ Great for calculating unexploitable shoves

  ♦ Fast calculations

  ♦ Pre-flop MES calculations

  ♦ Reports pre-flop strategies and EV

  ♦ Supports tournaments bounty calculations

  ♦ Independent Chip Model (ICM) and Future Game Simulations (FGS) for SNGs and
     MTTs

  ♦ Final table calculations


Cons
  ♦ Does not support post-flop play

  ♦ Does not account for card removal or bunching effects
GTO Solvers and Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Back in 1997, the at-the-time best chessplayer in the world, Garry Kasparov, lost to IBM super
computer, Deep Blue. His defeat was taken as a sign that someday artificial intelligence would
catch up with human intelligence.
  Ever since Deep Blue’s victory, AI has taken big steps towards humanity’s final defeat. In
2015, AlphaGo, an AI developed by Deep Mind, a world leader in artificial intelligence research,
became the first computer Go program to beat a human professional Go player in a full-sized
19X19 board. In May 2017, AlphaGo beat Ke Jie, the #1 world ranked player at the time. The
game of Go has an order of magnitude of 10170. Later the same year, Deep Mind released
AlphaZero, a chess and shogi AI that took the world by storm, achieving superhuman level of
play within 24 hours of release and defeating the world champion programs Stockfish and Elmo.
The game of chess has a magnitude order of 1047 and shogi has a magnitude order of 1071.
However, defeating the best human players is not the same as solving the game. An AI can be
good enough to beat the best humans, but then another AI could develop an even better strategy
and beat the previous AI. This cycle could continue forever. Solving a game involves computing
a game theory optimal solution (GTO) that is incapable of losing against any opponent in a fair
game.
   To date, every nontrivial game played competitively by humans that has been solved is a game
of perfect information. In perfect information games such as chess or checkers, each player can
see all the pieces of the board at all times. In imperfect information games such as poker,
players’ cards are hidden from other players. Solving these games presents an extra level of
difficulty.
  The game of checkers has 5 X 1020 possible moves and was completely solved in 2007 by
Professor Jonathan Schaeffer. Heads-Up Limit Hold’em (HULHE) is the smallest variant of
poker played competitively by humans. HULHE has 3.19 X 1014 decision points. Although it is
smaller than checkers, the imperfect information nature of HULHE makes it a far more
challenging game for computers to play and solve.
  The first full-scale poker game solved was HULHE, solved by University of Alberta Cepheus
Poker Project (2015). Their implementation of the CFR+ algorithm (counterfactual regret
minimization) was executed on a cluster of 200 computation nodes each with 24 2.1-GHz AMD
cores, 32 GB of RAM (6400GB of RAM), and a 1-TB local disk (200 TB Disk Storage).
  More Information about Cepheus can be found at poker.srv.ualberta.ca.
  On January 30th, 2017, the AI Libratus developed by Carnegie Mellon defeated top human
Heads-Up No-Limit Hold’em (HUNLHE) specialists in a 120,000 hand challenge.
   The size of HUNLHE is 10160 situations, which is more than the number of atoms in the
universe (1082). The AI required a cluster of super computers consisting of 600 nodes, each with
28 cores of processing power and a total of 2.7 petabytes of data, to complete the task and beat
the human players.
   More information about Libratus can be found here:
   cmu.edu/news/stories/archives/2017/january/AI-beats-poker-pros.html
   Poker bots are getting smarter every day, but with current computing power there are still
some limitations to what they can do, particularly in multi-way situations with infinite bet-sizes
and multiple stack depths in big bet games such as NLH and PLO. While HULHE has been fully
solved and Libratus is already good enough to beat top human players in HUNLHE, other poker
variations including tournaments, 6-max and full ring cash games are nowhere near to being
completely solved.
  Even though the full solution for hold’em games with more than two players has not been
found yet, complex games can be broken down into smaller, easier to solve pieces. With the use
of modern solvers, super-computers, limited bet-sizings and the correct application of strategy
abstractions, good approximations to No-Limit hold’em GTO play can be calculated.



Commercial Artificial Intelligence Software
Artificial intelligence-based software for NLH, such as Poker Snowie (pokersnowie.com), are
tools that have learned the game by playing trillions of hands against themselves. They begin
with completely random strategies and, after each hand is played, successful lines get reinforced
and unsuccessful lines get reduced, which results in their strategies being improved over time.


Pros
  ♦ Fast and easy to use

  ♦ Requires very little user input

  ♦ Does not have large hardware requirements

  ♦ Offers the ability to import hand histories from online games and evaluate them against
    the AI strategies

  ♦ Offers pre-flop and hand range advice
  ♦ User can play challenges, getting statistics and error evaluations


Cons
  ♦ Doesn’t actually solve for GTO strategies; the AI tool output is instead the result of the
    strategies the software believes are good when playing against itself

  ♦ Limited or fixed bet-sizes

  ♦ The AI can’t explain why it does what it does and results are not verifiable

  ♦ Cannot calculate exploitative strategies against weak players; the program only provides
    its core strategy

  ♦ Strategies change over time, which makes learning from it difficult

  ♦ Cannot guarantee unexploitability



GTO Solvers
Solvers are Nash Equilibrium calculators for pre-flop and post-flop play. There are several
commercially available and they offer different sets of characteristics. At the time of writing,
most commercial solvers can calculate Nash Equilibrium strategies for post-flop Limit and No-
Limit Hold’em situations with arbitrary ranges and bet-sizes in any heads-up spot to a very high
level of accuracy (low exploitability).
   Some solvers can calculate the pre-flop and post-flop Nash Equilibrium for multi-way
situations, and some can even solve for bigger games such as Pot-Limit Omaha.
   Claiming that a strategy is GTO or very close to it has to be backed up somehow. As stated
before, the complete solution to a game such as NLH hasn’t been found, so if a person claims to
have a GTO solution for a poker spot within a given abstraction, there must be a scientific and
mathematical way to verify this affirmation, otherwise anyone could claim to have solved the
game and play true GTO.


Nash Distance
Ɛ-Nash or Epsilon Equilibrium is a near-Nash Equilibrium Strategy Profile that approximately
satisfies the conditions of Nash Equilibrium. Nash equilibrium strategies maximize the utility
against their Nemesis (worst case adversary), meaning that in zero-sum games it cannot lose.
Nash equilibriums in complex games are not usually attainable. Instead, the term Ɛ-Nash
equilibrium is used to denote strategies which only lose Ɛ to its worst case adversary.
   Ɛ is also sometimes referred to as Nash distance, as it can be used to verify how close any
strategy is compared to Nash Equilibrium even without knowing what the true equilibrium looks
like.

Calculating the Nash Distance

Once you have a strategy pair that you think is GTO, the process to calculate the Nash distance is
quite simple. First, you compute the EV of both players, then you calculate Player1’s MES
against Player2, see how much this EV goes up and call P1’s EV gain Ɛ1, then you do the same
for Player2. Calculate their MES against Player1, see how much this EV goes up and call it Ɛ2.
The biggest number between Ɛ1 and Ɛ2 is the Nash Distance. If this number is 0, then you are at
exact Nash Equilibrium and the strategy pair is true GTO. If this number is big, then you are far
away from GTO and if you are close to GTO it will be small.
  Most modern GTO solvers report their solution’s Nash distance. For example, PioSOLVER
reports the Nash Distance as a % of the pot and it can be used to set up a desired accuracy for the
solver to finish performing calculations. Typically, the more time any GTO solution is run, the
lower the Ɛ gets. Unfortunately, most GTO solvers will bounce back and forth once Ɛ is very
small as they are unable to reach perfect GTO play. Once Ɛ is very small, it is unrealistic to
expect any Villain to be able to exploit you for that amount, as it would first require you to play
each combo on each node exactly as the solver does, then allow the Villain to know your exact
strategy at every single decision point and compute the MES against your Ɛ-GTO strategy. On
top of that, Villain would need to execute their MES perfectly to be able to extract all the
possible EV from you. So, it is pretty safe to assume that it would be impossible for anyone to
ever exploit you for Ɛ, and that you should not be worried about it. In practice, when Ɛ is small,
Ɛ-GTO is no different to perfect GTO for a human player.
   Personally, I like running my Flop GTO solutions to an accuracy of 0.35% of the pot. As
ranges get wider, SPR increases, and the game tree complexity increases, the harder it will be to
achieve a low Nash distance and the longer it will take to compute. For PioSOLVER pre-flop
simulations, the pre-flop ranges will converge a lot quicker than post-flop. Most of the
simulation’s exploitability will come from river play, so the threshold can be lowered and
exploitability can be measured in bb/100. The threshold I like for PioSOLVER pre-flop
simulations is 3.5bb/100.
   These thresholds are completely arbitrary, but there seems to be some consensus among the
players’ community about them being good enough, as the strategies don’t really change too
much at lower Nash distances.
   In other Solvers such as MonkerSolver, most of the exploitability comes from the suboptimal
post-flop play due to the post-flop abstractions. How much of this trickles down to the pre-flop
ranges is unclear, so the question of how exploitable the pre-flop ranges are, given optimal post-
flop play, is impossible to answer. I ran several benchmarks and compared both pre- and post-
flop simulations from Monker, Pio and a private GTO solver my team is working on and found
the strategies to be very close when using high abstraction settings. Before PioSOLVER was
mainstream I also ran a lot of benchmarks and tested its results with other tools, such as
CardRunners EV and Nash push/fold Calculators such as HRC, and found that the results
matched previous knowledge and theory.
   All in all, even if the game of poker hasn’t been completely solved, I’m confident that the
strategies derived from the work with GTO solvers are very accurate and can be used to improve
our understanding of the game of poker, helping us make better decisions at the tables which
ultimately translates into EV.



PioSOLVER
PioSOLVER (piosolver.com) is the most popular solver on the market. It solves for HUNLHE
equilibrium strategies with arbitrary starting ranges, stack sizes and bet-sizes to a desired
accuracy (exploitability).


Pros
  ♦ Reports Equity, EV, EQR, and full strategies

  ♦ Very accurate results

  ♦ Can calculate MES and MinES

  ♦ Aggregates frequency analysis and reporting features

  ♦ Solves for Limit and No-Limit Hold’em

  ♦ High compatibility with other poker tools

  ♦ Advanced scripting functionality
  ♦ ICM Calculations

  ♦ Pre-flop solver (heads-up only)

  ♦ Outstanding customer support


Cons
  ♦ User interface can be overwhelming at first but, once understood, the navigation becomes
    simple

  ♦ GTO calculations can take significant time to complete, depending on the size of the tree,
    stack depths, and ranges in play

  ♦ Steep learning curve. Utilizing it effectively requires some level of poker knowledge.

  ♦ High hardware requirements. The complexity of the solutions is limited by the computer’s
    capabilities, so it might require a system upgrade to run deep stack simulations with
    multiple bet-sizes, particularly if using the pre-flop solver.

  ♦ Only solves for heads-up situations

  ♦ Saving full simulations requires a lot of data storage, so in order to save disk space, Pio
    files can be saved without the river strategies, which will then be recalculated while
    browsing the simulations

  ♦ Setting up the simulations correctly can be tricky, particularly for new users. However,
    once the simulation has started, browsing the solutions is reasonably easy and intuitive.



MonkerSolver
MonkerSolver (monkerware.com) is the most versatile Solver on the market. It can solve
Hold’em and Omaha from any street, with any number of players using several abstraction
techniques to reduce the game size.


Pros
  ♦ Solves for complex multi-way NLH and PLO situations. However, the ability to solve
    larger and more complex games comes at a cost. The use of abstractions to reduce the
    game size produces less accurate solutions.

  ♦ Finalized simulations are easy to browse

  ♦ ICM calculations

  ♦ Can adjust simulations for rake effect

  ♦ Equity graphs

  ♦ Ability to manually export ranges to other tools in various formats


Cons
  ♦ Graphic use interface appears rough and users can easily feel overwhelmed, particularly if
    not computer savvy

  ♦ Very steep learning curve

  ♦ Requires high capacity hardware. The more powerful the computer used to run Monker
    simulations, the better the abstraction settings that can be used, and therefore the more
    accurate solutions. This forces users to build super computers or rent massive servers to
    run high accuracy solutions.

  ♦ Tree building process can be tedious and time consuming

  ♦ Pre-flop trees can take weeks to complete, depending on the size of the tree

  ♦ Limited range analysis tools

  ♦ Lacks the ability to run aggregate reports (summarize data across multiple flops)



GTO Poker Training Web Apps
GTO training apps such as GTO Poker (gtopoker.io) offer a wide variety of precomputed GTO
strategies for different poker variants including 6-max and heads-up cash games, MTTs,
HUSNGs, and Jackpot 3-max SNGs with multiple stack depths, and more. They make advanced
GTO strategies accessible to users who want to learn about GTO play but aren’t necessarily
interested in running their own calculations.


Pros
  ♦ Does not require installation or sophisticated computer requirements

  ♦ Offers carefully crafted high accuracy GTO strategies developed by experts using the
    most advanced private and commercial GTO solvers

  ♦ Easy to use, with sleek and intuitive user interface

  ♦ Real time advice, so no need to wait for calculations to complete

  ♦ Large solutions library that grows over time

  ♦ Multiway pre-flop and post-flop solutions

  ♦ Requires minimal user input

  ♦ Rake adjusted cash game solutions

  ♦ Advanced post-flop analytics


Cons
  ♦ Fixed bet-sizes

  ♦ Can’t calculate exploitative strategies against weak players (the program only provides a
    GTO core strategy)

  ♦ Limited to precomputed GTO solutions, so users cannot make custom calculations


   Modern Poker Theory and GTO Poker teamed up to offer you a special gift. Please visit
(gtopoker.io) and scan the QR code included in this book to get access to a full free month of
GTO Poker.
   I discuss all these tools and teach you how to use them in my training video series available on
D&B Poker at dandbpoker.com/book/modern-poker-theory
04




THE THEORY OF
PRE-FLOP PLAY
Pre-flop ranges are the backbone of fundamentally sound poker. Any time you make a mistake in
a hand, you are introducing systematic error, meaning the error will be carried through and will
affect future decision points. A pre-flop mistake can translate into a flop mistake, a turn mistake
and finally a river mistake. Even if you realize you made a mistake on an earlier street, it can be
difficult to compensate for it later.



Blinds and Antes
Without the blinds and antes, players would just happily wait to be dealt AA, or if deep enough,
hands that have the correct pot odds/implied odds to beat AA, and nothing more. The blinds
encourage players to fight for the money in the pot, and as a result, play more hands. The reason
players play hands other than AA is because there is money in the pot to be won.


Win Rate
A player’s skill edge or skill deficit over the player pool can be measured in the number of big
blinds won or lost per 100 hands. The bigger the edge a player has over their opponents, the
higher their win rate. If all players at the table are equally skilled, their win rates will be zero
and, in raked games, they will all lose however much money the house rakes.
   A player’s win rate depends on the opponents’ skill levels. This is why game selection is key
to the success or failure of all poker players’ careers. Suppose you are a skilled player and there
are two different games that run at your local casino: a tough $10/$20 game where your win rate
is a moderate 2bb/100, and a lower stake $2/$5 game where your win rate is 10bb/100. In the
tough game, you make on average $40 every 100 hands you play but, in the smaller game, you
make on average $50 every 100 hands you play. Over the long run, you will make more money
playing the smaller game while experiencing a lot less variance because swings are typically
higher in the bigger games where you have a lower edge.
   At a 6-max cash table (with no antes), there are 1.5 big blinds in the pot every hand, or 150 big
blinds every 100 hands (150bb/100). Imagine a situation where everyone was afraid to play you
and, any time you raise, your opponents would fold their hands every single time, including AA.
In that case, there would be no reason for you not to raise every hand with any two cards,
attaining a win rate of the full pot for 150bb/100. We know that such a situation is impossible
and, no matter who you are, there are some hands no player will ever fold. More importantly,
there are hands they will likely re-raise (which will force you to fold some hands and forfeit their
equity in the pot) and so we can conclude that no player can achieve a win rate of the full pot
(150bb/100).
   If no player can achieve a win rate of the full pot, how can you figure out what fraction of the
pot you are entitled to capture? Or in other words, how do you determine your win rate?
   Online players’ win rates are quite easy to calculate by using tracking software. After playing
100,000 hands, players start to get an idea of what their actual win rate looks like, but a sample
of at least 1,000,000 hands is required to be statistically significant. Live cash players can get an
estimate of their overall win rate over a period of time using this formula:




   For example, if a live player gets dealt about 300 hands over a 10-hour poker session and
plays five days per week, four weeks per month, they will be dealt approximately 6,000 hands
per month or 72,000 per year. If that player made $100,000 after one year of playing with $5/$10
blinds, their win rate was:
   Win rates tend to be a lot higher in live games compared to online games because live games
are almost always softer than online games. Casinos attract all kinds of recreational players
looking to gamble, socialize and have a good time. These players do not play anywhere near
fundamentally sound poker, resulting in strong players having higher win rates.
   Live players also lack the experience of online players. If a live player plays 300 hands per
day on average then, after one year, they will have played 72,000 hands. Online poker rooms
offer the possibility of multi-tabling, allowing players to play two, four, six, 10, or even 20 tables
at the same time. This, combined with the faster pace of the dealing software compared to the
speed of a human dealer, and the limited timebanks for decision making, results in an
exponential increase in the number of hands online players get dealt. A typical online player can
easily play 3,000 hands in a day, or 720,000 hands in a year. In one year, an online player will
play as many poker hands as a live player will in 10 years! Of course, there are other factors that
come into play and not necessarily all online players are better than live players, but this
difference alone is more than enough to make the average online player a lot tougher than the
average live player.
   Your overall win rate is the average of the win rates you have at each position of the table. At
a 6-max table, if the pot was to get split equally among all six positions, the win rate in each
position would be 25bb/100 but, as we will see, there are many factors that affect players’
profitability according to their position at the table. In some positions, the win rate can be higher
than 25bb/100, and for others, it will be lower (Table 15).




                       Table 15: Online 6-max Win Rate Examples (bb/100)

  The win rate in the blinds is always negative. The BB starts the hand posting 1bb, and the SB
posts 0.5bb, so their win rates start off at -100bb/100 and -50bb/100 respectively. Starting with
such a disadvantage, no matter how good a player is, their win rate in the blinds can never be as
good as the other positions. The BN has the highest win rate because that position gets to play
the most hands profitably. Win rates decrease as the position moves away from the BN.
   Most players lose money when playing poker. That is a fact. You must be really good just to
break even because you have to recover the -150bb/100 you lose to the blinds each round, as
well as the rake the house takes.
   Depending on the stakes you play and the poker site, the rake will usually be between 5 and 10
big blinds per 100 hands. Poker tracking software can be used to find the exact amount paid in
rake, as well as its effect on win rates. It is often the case, particularly in online micro stakes, that
the rake is so high that even strong players cannot win, so my advice to all players is to look
carefully at each site’s rake structure (as well as rake-back deals and VIP programs) before
deciding where to play. Higher rake can never be good for the players because it only means that
more money is being taken away from the tables and into the house’s pocket. Note that in ante
games, players also need to be able to recover the antes. An ante of 12.5% the size of the BB is
equivalent to -12.5bb/100.
   So, what can the players do to maximize their win rates and be able to beat the blinds and
rake?
   Your overall win rate is the aggregate of the EVs of all hands you were dealt in all positions
and the actions you took with them. So, the way to maximize your overall win rate is simply by
always taking the highest EV action with each hand you are dealt at every decision point.
   EV can be expressed as a win rate in bb/100, and we know that the EV of folding is 0, so
players should only play hands when the actions they can take have a non-negative win rate.


Example
9-max MTT (12.5% ante), 20bb effective stack. Action folds to the SB who has four options. Go
all-in for 20bb, raise to 2.5bb, limp or fold. We know that the EV of folding is always 0. Let’s
take a look at the win rates of the four actions for various hands in this situation (Table 16).
   According to the table, the best action to take with AA is to raise 2.5bb, AJo should push
20bb, Q7s should limp and given all actions for 72o have a negative win rate, it should be folded.
   Your overall win rate in the SB when the action folds to you is 88bb/100 (Table 17). That is
simply the aggregate EV of each one of the 1,326 possible hands. The hands with negative EV
will be folded and have 0EV, and all other hands will have EV equal to the highest EV action. If
you choose any action other than the highest EV for each hand vs a GTO opponent, your win
rate in the spot can only go down.
            Table 16: (EVs Calculated with PioSOLVER, Assuming a GTO opponent)

   For example, if you choose to go all-in with 72o, you will lose -63bb/100 on average. Going
all-in with AA is +EV, but not the highest EV play. In fact, going all-in with AA is -136bb/100
worse than raising to 2.5bb, so this mistake is even worse than pushing 72o. It is very important
that you do not make the common mistake of thinking that just because a play is +EV it is the
correct play.

     Any action should always be compared to all other possibilities before deciding your
  play.




          Table 17: Blinds Win Rate when Folded to Them (BB 40, Stacks 800, i.e.20bb)

  The more hands you can profitably play, and the higher average profitability of each hand, the
higher your win rate will be. Each decision you make on every single hand increases or
decreases your overall win rate. In cash games, win rates are directly proportional to the player’s
profitability in the games (as seen in Table 18), but in tournaments that is not always the case
because the value of the chips is not directly proportional to their dollar value. We will discuss
tournaments later in the Tournament Theory chapter. That said, win rates can still be quite useful
for tournament players as they say a lot about the player’s skills and can be used to find leaks
when win rates are lower than expected.




  Table 18: Example of Players’ Profitability in Cash Games After 1,000,000 Hands Played at
                                        Different Stakes

   Although the differences in win rates can seem small, they quickly add up as the stakes and
sample size increase. If higher win rates translate to higher winnings, your aim, as a poker
player, should be to increase your win rate as much as possible by consistently taking +EV spots
and avoiding -EV spots. In the long run, the players who make the best decisions on average will
end up with all of the money and the players who make the most mistakes will inevitably lose.



Complex Strategies
Why do players employ complex strategies? Why don’t they just implement a simple push/fold
strategy, getting it in with the good hands and folding the bad ones?
   This section will compare two of the simplest pre-flop situations in order to understand the
value of having different strategic options and playing complex strategies.


Situation 1: Hero is in the SB playing OOP vs the BB
Game: 3-max SNG
Stack depths: 8bb, 10bb, 12bb, 15bb, 17bb, 20bb & 25bb
Blinds: 0.5bb/1bb
Players: 3 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) BN folds and the action is on Hero in the SB. He can fold, limp, raise to 2bb,
to 2.5bb, to 3bb, or push all-in.


Situation 2: Hero is on the BN playing IP vs the BB
Game: Heads-up SNG
Stack depths: 8bb, 10bb, 12bb, 15bb, 17bb, 20bb & 25bb
Blinds: 0.5bb/1bb
Players: 2 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) Hero is first to act on the BN. He can fold, limp, raise to 2bb, to 2.5bb, to 3bb,
or push.

   The two situations described are very similar. Hero is in the SB in both, but Situation 1 is a 3-
max game so Hero is OOP vs the BB whereas Situation 2 is heads-up vs the BB, meaning Hero
has the BN and will be IP post-flop. If both players were playing a push/fold only strategy with
no post-flop play, the situations would be equivalent. However, if we solve the spot using
modern pre-flop solvers and give the players additional strategic options such as limping and the
ability to use different raise sizings other than all-in, we can compare the different situations and
try to get some insights about the value of the various strategic options and how they are affected
by position.
                             Diagram 2: Average EV by Stack Depth




                          Table 19: Average EV for Different Strategies

   We see that by playing a more complex strategy than push/fold, Hero captures a larger portion
of the pot, an extra 4.62% pot (7bb/100) when out of position and 14.6% pot (22bb/100) when in
position. With very shallow stacks, the EV loss of applying a push/fold only strategy is very
small, but as stacks get deeper, and particularly when having position, the value of other strategic
options increases. Playing a more complex strategy than push/fold yields Hero a higher payoff.




                      Diagram 3: Average Fold Frequency by Stack Depth
                              Table 20: Average Fold Frequency

   Hero’s folding frequency is the highest when playing push/fold (Table 20), which means that
this strategy limits the number of hands Hero can profitably play, particularly as stacks get
deeper. Conversely, the folding frequency is lower when playing a more complex strategy,
especially when having position.
  With over 17bb, pushing is very rarely used by the BN, but becomes the dominant strategy
with fewer than 10bb. The SB pushing frequencies are a lot higher than BN because going all-in
diminishes the disadvantage of being OOP.




                      Diagram 4: Hero Push Frequency by Stack Depth
                                           Table 21




                      Diagram 5: Hero Limp Frequency by Stack Depth




                                           Table 22

   Limping is used 42.51% more often when Hero is IP compared to OOP, becoming the
dominant strategy (Table 23). Notice how limping becomes more important for the SB as stacks
get deeper but remains relatively constant for the BN. This means that when Hero is IP, limping
is almost as important at all stack depths, and when Hero is OOP, limping becomes more
valuable as stacks get deeper when Hero loses the ability to open push very wide.
                          Table 23: SB Average Frequencies (8-25bb)

   The only raise size BN uses is to 2bb (min-raise). Other bet-sizes are used only when Hero is
in the SB, so we can conclude the bigger sizings benefit Hero when OOP, but don’t add much
value when playing with position.




                          Diagram 6: Small Blind (3-Max) Bet-sizing

   Minraising is the dominant strategy at the shorter stack depths (when OOP), but starting with
15bb stacks, 2.5x becomes dominant. 3x begins to be used at 20bb and becomes dominant at
25bb (Diagram 6). So, we can conclude that when playing out of position, bet-size should
increase as stacks get deeper.


Conclusion
Having access to more strategic options increases the player’s expectation. However, some
strategic options are used so rarely and their overall EV impact is so small that the cost of
implementing them in your strategies may surpass the value they add. In fact, adding too many
low EV/low frequency strategic options to your overall strategy can hurt your expectation. The
more complex the strategy, the more difficult it is to implement so, in practice, you should strive
to simplify your strategies as much as possible in order to minimize mistakes without hurting
your overall expectation.
   In our heads-up example, the simplest possible strategy is push/fold, and it can be applied for
most spots with 10bb and shorter stacks. When out of position, pushing remains vital up to 17bb,
but the BN pushes only 3.88% of hands with 15bb, 1.70% with 17bb, 0.69% with 20bb, and
0.06% with 25bb. So, the BN strategy can be simplified to never push with 15bb or more and the
overall EV of the BN won’t be hurt significantly. However, the limping strategy is dominant for
the BN, so any strategy that removes BN limps in a heads-up game will significantly hurt its
overall EV.
   Corollary: If playing vs an opponent who we think has superior skill, then playing a complex
strategy only benefits the stronger player because they will be capable of capitalizing on all the
different strategic options better than you are. Thus playing a simpler game helps reduce this
superior Villain’s edge by minimizing your mistakes. For example, if playing heads-up in an
MTT, it doesn’t matter if you are against the best player in the world if you get it all-in pre-flop
with a coinflip like AJs vs TT. You will win ~50% of the time, which is a great result when
facing a player who has a huge edge on you.



Playing First In
Knowing what to do when the action gets folded to you is perhaps the single most important
thing players must learn in their entire poker careers, yet I still see professional players simply
not caring. They mistakenly think they can outplay anyone regardless of their holdings and make
massive fundamental mistakes that cost them dearly in the long run.
   Starting with sound pre-flop ranges improves pre-flop decision making. By systematically
analyzing the game, strong players come to the tables prepared with preset strategies for the most
common situations that get repeated over time. This is similar to chess grandmasters who
memorize the early moves of the most important openings and pre-develop defenses rather than
trying to re-invent them every game. By committing the basic moves to memory, they can focus
their brain power on more complex aspects of the game in order to stay ahead of their opponents.
   A typical online 6-max Cash EP-RFI range can be seen in Hand Range 27.
                 Hand Range 27: A Typical Online 6-max Cash EP RFI Range

  Not everyone will play this exact RFI range, but most serious players will play some variation
of it. A player who knows more or less what an EP RFI Range looks like will have a huge
advantage over a player who has never studied the spot before. Instead of hesitating and
wondering whether or not they are supposed to open hands such as JTo, the prepared player
knows JTo is not a standard open and will be aware of spots to expand or shrink their range if
they see an opportunity to exploit a weakness in the other players. Rather than second guessing
themselves all the time, a player who has done the work off the tables will consistently recognise
familiar situations that they will already know how to approach, while their opponents may be
clueless. When they encounter a completely new situation, a player who has studied poker theory
can extrapolate results from other known situations and will make way fewer mistakes compared
to a player who is oblivious to the underlying principles of the game.
   Well-constructed pre-flop ranges also make post-flop play easier, because they will have the
right board coverage and better playability than improvised strategies. There is a lot to be gained
by developing a solid, well-balanced GTO pre-flop baseline strategy. That said, a baseline pre-
flop GTO strategy should only be a starting point. The strongest players are those who can adapt
as circumstances require. Once you have developed sound and balanced strategies for yourself, it
becomes a lot easier to spot when your opponents have not, allowing you to easily realize when
they are unbalanced and exploitable.
   Just as in chess, the rules of poker are quite easy to learn, but there are many underlying
principles that govern the game. Understanding those principles is the key to success. In the next
section we are going to study those principles and develop the building blocks players need to
understand to play solid pre-flop strategies.


Main Variables that Affect Pre-flop Hand Ranges
Absolute Hand Strength

Although hand strength is relative to the composition of the ranges in play, it can sometimes be
helpful to think about hand strength in a vacuum. This is known as absolute hand strength.
Below are the principles used to determine a poker hand’s absolute hand strength.

   High Card Value: The higher the cards in your hand, the stronger the hand tends to be. A
hand with an ace in it will be stronger than a hand with a king in it which will be stronger than a
hand with a queen in it and so on.
   Pocket Pairs: Applying the high card principle to a pocket pair it follows that the higher the
pocket pair rank, the stronger and more valuable it is (KK>55).
   Suitedness: All things being equal, a suited hand will be stronger than an offsuit one. First of
all, they have more raw equity than their offsuit counterparts and the playability of suited hands
is much better. For example, A♥5♥ is preferable to A♥5♦ because A♥5♥ has the ability to flop
nut flushes and the flushes it makes are more disguised than the ones made with a single ace and
four suited cards on the board, making it more likely to get paid when it hits.
   Connectedness: Hands with cards closer in rank to each other are preferred to hands with
gaps in between. For example, T9 is preferable to T8 and T7 because T9 has more ways to make
straights than the other hands: T9 can make a straight on KQJ, QJ8, J87, and 876, and three of
those are nut straights. T8 can make a straight on QJ9, J97, and 976, and only two of those are
nut straights. T7 can make straights on J98 and 986 with only one straight being the nuts.

  In general, the best poker hands have at least two of these components. Hands that lack high
card value can compensate by having great connectedness and suitedness, such as 87s, and hands
that lack suitedness can have great high card value such as AKo.
   As a rule of thumb, the earlier your position at the table, the higher absolute high card strength
your hand must have to be playable. As you get into later positions, weaker absolute hand
strength hands can be played. For example, in a 6-max cash game with no ante, the BN can
profitably play hands as weak and disconnected as Q2s, but from the LJ, the weakest Qx that can
be played is Q9s.

The Size of the Pot

As the pot gets larger in terms of big blinds, more hands can be played profitably. For example,
in a 9-max MTT with 12.5% antes, the size of the pot is 2.625bb. If the action gets folded to the
BN, they can push 10 big blinds with 46% of hands, but without antes, the pot size is only 1.5bb,
and then the BN can only push 33% of hands.

Bet-size

In general, the bottom of your range contains hands that have a low profitability (or are
indifferent), so the bigger your bet-size relative to the pot, the fewer hands you can profitably
play. By betting larger, you risk more, meaning you lose more on average with your weak hands
when you face a re-raise and have to fold. Ideally, you want to lose as little as possible when
your steals fail.

Likelihood of Being Raised/Re-raised

As seen when we studied MDF, if Villains do not defend often enough, you can exploit them by
opening more hands than you would normally be able to. You may even be able to blatantly bet
or raise 100% of hands in some spots. Conversely, against good/optimal opponents, there is a cap
to the number of hands you can profitably play at any given time because they will play back at
you and force you to fold pre-flop, denying your equity in the pot.


Example
Game: Live Cash Game
Effective Stack: 100bb
Blinds: 0.5/1
Players: 6 (no ante)
Pre-flop: (1.5bb) Hero is in the SB with Q7s and raises to 3bb. What can the Villain in the BB
do to make this raise have a negative win rate?




   The EV of Q7s when called is always a positive number because Q7s has a certain amount of
equity in the pot. Even if Villain could somehow make Q7s realize 0% of its post-flop equity, the
worst that could happen is that Hero wins 0% of the pot. The only way Villain can make your
raise unprofitable is to increase their 3-bet frequency, so let’s figure out how often Villain needs
to 3-bet to make the Q7s raise unprofitable.
   For simplicity we assume Villain will only 3-bet or fold, and that Hero always folds Q7s vs a
3-bet, so:




  To find the values that make the EV of raising Q7s negative we make:
   If Hero gets 3-bet more than 37.5% of the time, opening Q7s becomes -EV. Of course, in a
real poker game, the BB will never 3-bet 37.5% vs the SB, and if they did, they would be
opening up to serious exploitation.
   It is worth noting that the likelihood of getting 3-bet increases as there are more Villains yet to
act. Imagine that instead of the SB, Hero’s position is UTG. How often can Hero expect to get 3-
bet at a 9-max table?
   On average, we can expect Hero to be 3-bet roughly 7% of the time by each player yet to act.
Ignoring blocker effects, the total frequency Hero can expect to get 3-bet is:
  At a 9-max table with eight villains left to act, Hero can expect to be 3-bet ~44% of the time.
Assuming Hero will fold to a 3-bet, raising Q7s has a negative win rate:




   Ignoring opponents’ calls, the win rate of raising to 2.5x from UTG with Q7s at a 9-max table
is -26bb/100.
   The number of hands a player can profitably RFI depends on the likelihood of being 3-bet.
Since the likelihood of being 3-bet increases as there are more players yet to act, as your
positional advantage increases you can profitably raise with more hands (this is the main reason
players get to play more hands from the BN than from UTG).


Rake Effect
When the rake is taken from the pot, it has an effect on players’ strategies because it reduces the
profitability of all hands being played. Many hands that are marginally +EV raises or calls
become -EV and lose money over the long run. One of the main reasons cash games tend to have
larger bet-sizings than tournaments is to discourage calls. Since the rake is paid in tournaments
along with the buy-in, it has no effect on the profitability of the hands played in-game, allowing
for more passive play in tournaments compared to cash games with high rake. In general, the
higher the rake, the tighter the pre-flop ranges should be. Aggressive actions that can take the pot
down pre-flop will take precedence over passive actions.


Example
Game: Online heads-up Cash Game
Effective Stack: $1,000
Players: 2
Blinds: $5/$10 (no ante)
Pre-flop: Hero in the BN
Let’s compare Hero’s BN GTO strategy without rake compared to a $5/$10 game with a 4.3%
Rake, $2.20 maximum structure.

  As we can see, when rake is a factor, raising frequency increases, limping frequency is
reduced, and more hands get folded (Hand Ranges 28 and 29).
  Next, let’s make the same comparison for the BB strategy facing a 2.5bb raise from the SB
(Hand Ranges 30 and 31).




                   Hand Range 28: Heads-up BN GTO strategy (No Rake)
    • Raise 2.5bb 70.1% / • Limp 18.3% / • Fold 11.6%




Hand Range 29: Heads-up BN GTO strategy (Rake Adjusted)
    • Raise 2.5bb 76.4% / • Limp 6.9% / • Fold 16.7%
Hand Range 30: Heads-up BB vs BN 2.5x Open GTO strategy (No Rake)
            • 3Bet 10bb 19.9% / • Call 55% / • Fold 25%
         Hand Range 31: Heads-up BB vs BN 2.5x Open GTO strategy (Rake Adjusted)
                      • 3Bet 10bb 22.7% / • Call 45% / • Fold 32.3%

  Again, for the BB rake-adjusted solution we see an increase in raising frequency, a decrease in
calling frequency and more folding than in the solution with no rake.


Bunching Effect
Folding ranges have an impact on the hand distribution of the players left to act. For example, at
a 9-max table, after six folds, the BN’s raise first in range has to be tighter at a 3-max table
because other players have already folded “weak” hands, meaning the likelihood that the blinds
have a strong hand increases.
   In Table 24 we can see how pushing ranges generated with MonkerSolver change due to the
bunching effect for different stack depths at different table sizes (12.5% ante). These results are
compared to those of the traditional push/fold calculator HRC (which ignores the bunching
effect).




                                 Table 24: The Bunching Effect

   Accounting for the bunching effect, the SB has to push on average 4.9% tighter than
traditional push/fold calculators suggest, BN has to be 2.2% tighter, CO 1.7%, HJ 0.9%, and LJ
0.3%. The earlier the position, the lower the bunching effect because fewer players have folded,
hence in early position, the bunching effect can be dismissed because it approaches zero.



Limping
It is important to also discuss the possibility of limping and also what strategy to adopt when
facing limpers.


Open Limp
Limping allows you to play a wider distribution of hands by investing the minimum amount
possible, but the tradeoff is having to play post-flop most of the time allowing your opponents to
realize equity they would have otherwise folded. Additionally, developing a limping strategy
involves splitting your ranges early, which gives your opponents a lot of information about your
hand strength.
   For example, if you only limp hands such as small pairs, weak suited aces and suited
connectors, your opponents will be able to play well against you because some flops will hit you
quite hard while others will miss completely. If you limp only medium strength hands, your
opponents get to raise aggressively because you never have hands strong enough to re-raise. This
will force you to start limping some strong hands to balance your limping range, which will
weaken your raising range. Then you will still have the problem of having a capped range on
many flops after you limp/call because you no longer have the top of your range (because you
will have limp/re-raised your strongest hands).
   While this analysis may sound grim, limping strategies do have their place in GTO play.
Solvers like applying them primarily in blind vs blind battles in rake-free environments such as
tournaments. However, given the nature of modern games where most player populations under-
defend their blinds, over-fold to c-bets, don’t 3-bet often enough, and don’t peel as often as they
should (even in tough games), raising has a lot of added value and will remain the dominant
strategy for some time to come. Despite the obvious advantages of raising in today’s games, due
to the proliferation of solvers and GTO strategies, I expect to see an increase in the use of
limping strategies in the future, especially in tournaments.
   For the scope of this book, limping strategies will be limited to situations where the EV they
add to your overall strategy is significant, particularly when playing vs tough opponents.


Facing Limpers
It is very infrequent to see open limps in modern online poker, unless you are playing
microstakes. In live games, however, limping happens far more often, and the reason for this is
the exact same reason it happens in online microstakes: the presence of very weak players.
   For the reasons outlined earlier, most strong players won’t implement limping strategies, so in
general if you see a player open limp from any other position than the SB you can pretty safely
assume they aren’t a really strong player. If that’s the case there are a few different ways you can
attack them depending on the type of player they are.

Weak Passive

If the limper is the type of player who rarely raises and tends to check-fold when they miss, you
can isolate them with a very wide range and expect to take down the pot post-flop with a very
high frequency.
   How wide you can isolate this player will depend on the other players at the table. If they are
willing to attack you with 3-bets you should be careful and raise a similar range to what you
would open from that position if the action was folded to you. If they will be calling a lot of
raises which will lead to multi-way pots, you need to have hands that play well in multi-way pots
such as suited connectors, pocket pairs and Axs. If the players behind you are not aware or
aggressive, you can get away with raising almost anything that has some playability.

Sticky

If the limper is the type of player who doesn’t like to fold, you should play hands that will flop
good top pairs and then take them to value town. Against this type of player, any top pair and
most second pairs are good enough to value-bet for three streets.
   It is fine to semi-bluff against them but if your draw bricks on the river be ready to give up
most of the time and never run stone cold bluffs. There is nothing they love more than calling
down with bottom pair across all three streets to be shown the old airball!

Aggressive

If the limper is very aggressive and will be check-raising and leading against you, do yourself a
favor and don’t isolate this player too wide. Your range should be made up of very strong hands
that can stand the heat. Be careful with your medium strength hands by checking them and
controlling the size of the pot so you can bluff-catch more efficiently, and if you have a good but
not great hand, don’t be afraid of playing for stacks.
Trappy

If the limper is the trappy type and limps in with strong hands such as AK and AA with the
intention of limp-raising, feel free to over-limp with all sorts of suited and connected hands and
small pocket pairs. Other players at the table will hesitate to raise behind because of the threat of
a limp-raise and you will be able to play very well post-flop against this face-up range.
   Against this type of player, you should raise a polarized range constructed of hands that can
withstand a 3-bet and hands that have good blockers and you are happy to raise-fold.



Open Push
Going all-in, also referred to as open pushing, is the most powerful bet you can make. It allows
you to realize 100% of your equity with all of the hands in your range, but also involves the
higher risk of putting your entire stack on the line. You can no longer fold the weaker hands in
your range when your opponents would have 3-bet you if you had raised to a smaller size. In
general, the more chips you have and the more players left to act, the less inclined you should be
to go all-in.


Example 1
At a 9-max table with 12.5% antes and a 10bb stack, UTG can only push 14.4% hands whereas
the SB can push 74.7%. This is because UTG has to worry about other eight players waking up
with a strong hand while SB only has to worry about the BB.


Example 2
At a 9-max table with 12.5% antes and a 12bb stack, the BN can open push 41.5% hands but
with 15bb can only open push 37.2% hands. As you risk more chips, you must raise tighter.
  In general, with fewer than 10bb, players can open push from any position. The earlier your
position and the larger your stack, the tighter you should push (Table 25).




      Table 25: Maximum Stack Depth (bb) to Open Push by Position (MTTs 12.5% ante)

  In general, when going all-in pre-flop, if you are shoving your entire range, you want your
range to be linear, consisting of the top hands that have the best equity when called.
  If you are splitting your range by using a shove/raise/fold strategy, you want your open
shoving range to be condensed, consisting of hands that are too good to raise/fold, while not
good enough to raise/call, and will have good equity when called, like Axs, Q9s and 87s.
  You want your non-all-in raising range to be polar, consisting of hands with good blocker
value such as Axo that you plan to fold if your opponent pushes, and premium hands you are
happy to raise/call, such as KK.



General Guidelines for Pre-flop Bet-sizing
The earlier your position, the smaller your bet-sizing should be because the threat of opponents
waking up with re-raising hands increases. The wider your range becomes, the bigger your bet-
sizing should be because more of your opponents’ hands will have the right equity to call the
same raise size vs a wider range. In general, when facing a bet or raise, the bigger the bet-size
faced, the smaller number of hands you have to defend to remain unexploitable.
   Multiple bet-sizes should be used only in different situations. For example, you can use
different bet-sizes for the BN and UTG, or use different bet-sizes for different stack depths, but
bet-size should never be changed depending on your hand strength because, by doing so, you
convey a lot of information about your range early on, and that information can be used to
exploit weaknesses in your hand distribution.
   When the opponents left to act have good rejamming stack depths (under 25bb) the optimal
bet-size is always a min-raise because it gives them the worst possible price on their all-in re-
raise. With deeper stacks, bigger bet-sizings are better because your opponents are getting better
implied odds with their speculative hands, so you want to discourage them from calling,
especially when they have position.
   If you are re-raising pre-flop with a polarized range, and your opponent’s main response is to
re-raise or fold, you should use the minimum bet-size possible to minimize your losses with the
raise/folding hands in your range.
   Being out of position favors larger bet-sizes because you want to decrease the positional
advantage of the IP player by reducing the SPR. Conversely, having position favors the use of
smaller bet-sizes because, even if called, you still have the positional advantage on the later
betting rounds. However, betting small also has some disadvantages, such as giving your
opponents a better price on their calls, allowing them to defend profitably with more hands.
  Using solvers to test pre-flop bet-sizing, I found that for similar bet-sizes, the differences in
EV are quite small and even indifferent in many situations. For example, going from a 2.25bb to
a 2.3bb open size won’t have a significant EV impact in your bottom line.
   The solvers are indifferent to using similar bet-sizings as long as the other player understands
the best way to respond to each specific bet-size. Since different bet-sizes will have different
optimal responses, and not all opponents will be capable of responding effectively to all bet-
sizes, the best bet-size is the one that takes your opponents to a branch of the game tree with
which they are unfamiliar, leading them to make the greatest number of mistakes.
   There must be a sweet spot for pre-flop bet-sizing that lowers your risk while maximizing fold
equity. However, the game of poker is not fully solved yet, so there is no definite answer to the
“correct” pre-flop bet-sizing. Furthermore, there is always room for exploitative bet-sizing
against specific opponents, making applying the general bet-size guidelines more of an art form
than a science.



General Pre-flop Play Heuristics
You will always take the highest EV action with each hand in your range at any decision point.
Note the following points.


From each position, you will play a distribution of hands that is strong relative to the
random hands yet to act.
If another player has voluntarily entered the pot, your hand distribution has to be strong relative
to the remaining random hands and the hand distribution of the player who entered the pot. For
example, the CO raising range vs an UTG limp has to be tighter than the raising range if the
action was folded to the CO because CO has to be concerned about the UTG limper.
  From each position, you will play some variety of hands that will have a positive expectation
against the remaining players (including the rake effect in raked games).


In general, hands that use mixed strategies (sometimes raising and sometimes folding) are
threshold hands.
Given the card removal effects in Hold’em you can expect to see more hands having mixed
strategies. The worst hands in your range will have zero EV and will be indifferent between
raising and folding when playing against good/optimal opponents. However, you can increase
your raising frequency by adding more weak hands to your range against weak opponents
because they won’t be playing back at you aggressively enough to make the bottom of your
regular raising range indifferent.
Whenever we are exploitatively opening a wider range than usual and face a 3-bet, it’s fine
to over-fold.
You are exploiting the fact that you won’t get 3-bet often enough by playing off-range hands. So,
when you get 3-bet, your adjustment should be to fold all off-range hands and even hands that
would be the bottom of your regular calling range.
   The most important players to consider when deciding whether or not to open marginal hands
are the BN, SB and the BB because those positions are the most likely to give you action. If the
players in those positions are tight, you can get away with a lot of blind stealing.


In poker, randomizing refers to the employment of aleatoric selection between equivalent
EV actions to guarantee unpredictability.
For example, if a hand is indifferent to calling or folding (the EV of both actions is the same) and
the GTO solution is to call 50% and fold 50%, the player can randomize these two actions by
flipping a coin. Online players can use a random number generator (e.g. random.org) to help
them stay unpredictable with hands that have mixed strategies.
   Live players can use a number of randomizers such as the seconds hand on a clock or the suit
of their hole cards. For example, the probability of the top card of a two-card hand being a red
card is 50%, so a player can randomize using the color of the top card of their poker hand.
Players can also choose a suit such as hearts, and if their first card is a heart, choose various 25%
plays. They can also simply look at a random number generator app before starting each hand.
There are many tricks players can use to randomize their actions in live games. However, live
games are often particularly soft, so wise decisions tend to be more binary, and there are
regularly additional pieces of information players can use to tie-break close decisions, such as
body language, history, population tendencies, etc. All of this, along with the fact that it will be
tough for your opponents to get a large enough sample on you to be able to unravel your exact
frequencies makes randomizing less needed in live poker than online poker.


The best approach when exploitatively widening your ranges is to start by increasing the
frequency of hands that are played with a mixed strategy.
This is because the threshold hands are the first hands to become profitable against Villain leaks.
For example, if a hand such as A9o is bet 25% of the time in some spot, the best exploit against a
player who overfolds will be to bet A9o 100% of the time. From there, you can add hands that
are very close to the borderline hands, such as perhaps A8o and A7o, instead of randomly adding
something like Q4o. This type of adjustment is more difficult to spot by the Villain, decreasing
the likelihood of them counter-exploiting you, and when you do get counter-exploited or are
wrong about your assessment of the Villain’s leak, the hands you are adding to your strategy will
have the right blockers, meaning they won’t be as -EV as random hands.


Avoid putting yourself in difficult spots by always thinking a few steps ahead.
For example, if you are thinking about 3-betting with a medium strength hand but would not
know what to do if your opponent re-raises, you should call instead. This also applies post-flop.
If you don’t know what to do with your hand if your opponent re-raises, then check instead.
Before open raising, always consider the players yet to act. Are they likely to re-raise you? If so,
how would you react against a re-raise? And what if they 5-bet after you 4-bet? Are you happy
getting this hand all-in pre-flop? Is your hand too good to 4-bet/fold? If so, just call if you get 3-
bet. Thinking ahead will allow you to sidestep many difficult spots recreational players find
themselves in on a regular basis.

    Poker players tend to have two main types of leak. Either their action frequencies are
  wrong, or they put the wrong type of hands in their ranges.

  Typically, the first and easiest leak to fix is when your frequencies are wrong, which is
particularly true when playing online poker. Most online regulars will have a HUD (Heads Up
Display) that shows the frequency with which players take different actions. In this case it
becomes very evident when their tendencies are far away from optimal.
  For example, if you know that the optimal RFI frequency from the LJ in a cash game is ~17%
and you notice you are opening 22%, then you should cut down the extra 5% of hands from your
range if you think you are being exploited by your opponents.
  The other type of leak is a lot harder to spot, as a player could have very well been taking
actions with the right frequencies, but putting the wrong hands in their range. This is the main
reasons most regulars struggle to move up in stakes. More often than not they don’t even know
where to start looking. They understand their own and their opponents stats, and they have a
general idea of what the ranges look like but they also notice the top players shifting gears and
showing up all the time with stuff they didn’t expect them to have. They ask their coaches and
friends and they all seem to have different answers to the same questions.
   In the next chapter I aim to show you not only the right frequencies but also the right range
composition, so you can estimate by yourself how to adapt to the different situations at the poker
table, think on your feet, attack your opponent’s leaks and fix your own.
05




6-MAX CASH GAME EQUILIBRIUM
STRATEGIES (100BB)
This chapter presents GTO recommended 6-max baseline strategies produced with modern
solvers and supercomputers for a typical $2/$5 online cash game, 5% rake, capped at $3. These
strategies are designed to be a solid guideline but they must be adjusted to the specific games
you find yourself in.
   The best use for GTO solvers is to analyze the recommended strategies and try to understand
why the solver is choosing to play hands in the way it does, incorporating the underlying GTO
principles such as pot odds, equity, fold equity, EV, equity realization, SPR, range polarization,
board coverage, MDF, exploitation and balance to our decision-making process instead of trying
to memorize fixed strategies.

    In some sense, you should try to “become” the solver so you can determine the correct
  decision for yourself. Each hand is a puzzle, and solving that puzzle to the best of your
  ability is your job as a poker player.


Charts are a good starting point. They can be used to guide you in the right direction but should
never be followed blindly.



Recommended Bet-sizings
This section presents bet-sizes based on the previously discussed principles, extensive testing
with pre-flop GTO solvers and discussions with world class players. In live cash games, bet-sizes
tend to be a lot bigger than online, but live cash games also tend to be played with deeper stacks,
which will generate similar post-flop SPRs. Following are the recommended sizings.


Heads-up
BN RFI: 2.5bb, BB 3-bet: 10bb, BN 4-bet: 23bb, BB 5-bet: All-in (100bb).
6-Max
RFI: LJ, HJ, CO, BN: 2.5bb, SB: 3bb.
3-bet: IP: 8.5bb, OOP: 10bb (when squeezing you can add 2-3bb)
4-bet: 23bb
5-bet: All-in (100bb)


BvB
SB Limp:
BB Raise vs SB Limp: 3.5bb
SB 3-bet: 13bb
BB 4-bet: 28bb
SB 5-bet: All-in (100bb)
SB Raise:
SB: 3bb
BB 3-bet: 9bb
SB 4-bet: 24bb
BB 5-bet: All-in (100bb)



GTO Raise First In Strategies
We will start the pre-flop analysis with the simplest possible scenario, blind vs blind battles. We
will then expand the strategies by incorporating BN, CO, HJ, and finally LJ. It is important to
note that these baseline strategies are computed using the recommended bet-sizes, so adjustments
have to be made when facing different bet-sizes.


Small Blind
The small blind is one of the most interesting and difficult positions to play. You will be out of
position the entire hand, which reduces your ability to realize equity and makes playing less
enticing. However, you also have a discount in your price to enter the pot, which incentivizes
you to play more hands.
  The best approach to SB play when the action gets folded to you is to split your range,
developing a limping strategy and a raising strategy (Hand Range 32). By incorporating a
limping strategy, you get to play more hands, taking advantage of the discount to enter the pot
while keeping your overall raise frequency low, making BB’s 3-bets less effective. Also, the SB
is the position where you want to have a bigger open raise size because you are out of position
and want to discourage calls.




                                    Hand Range 32: SB RFI
                           • 3x 24.4% / • Limp 37.7% / • Fold 37.9%

  After SB limps and BB raises to 3.5x, the SB wants to re-raise a linear range made of high
equity hands, so if you get 4-bet, you can call and have hands that will have better equity
realization in low SPRs. Against a 4-bet, you slowplay AA by calling (98%), and 5-bet push KK
(100%), QQ (100%), AK (100%), JJ (32%), TT (64%), 99 (6%) and A5s (78%) (Hand Range
33).
   After you raise to 3x from the SB and face a BB 3-bet, most of your middle strength hands
really hate to 4-bet/fold vs an all-in and just want to take a flop. Therefore your 4-bet range is
polarized, consisting of hands with good blockers that are happy to either call or fold vs a 5-bet
push while having good board coverage in case Villain decides to flat the 4-bet (Hand Range
34). Your stacking off range vs a 5-bet push is 66+, AKo, AQs+.




                         Hand Range 33: SB Limp vs BB 3.5x Iso Raise
                           • L/R 13.4% / • Call 39.8% / • Fold 46.8%




                            Hand Range 34: SB 3x Raise vs BB 3-bet
                          • 4-bet 17.2% / • Call 37.4% / • Fold 45.4%


Button
When the action folds to you on the BN, you play a raise or fold strategy (Hand Range 35).
                                    Hand Range 35: BN RFI
                               • Raise 2.5x: 43.4% / • Fold 56.6%

   As explained before, the rake makes open limping a lot less profitable in cash games and,
unlike the SB, the other positions don’t get a discount on their limps. By limping from other
positions, you encourage other players to enter the pot which is not a desirable outcome because,
in multi-way pots, the pot will be split among more players. Furthermore, the likelihood of other
players raising over your limps increases with the number of players left to act. Therefore
limping from any position other than the SB involves a higher risk of getting raised, which will
either force you to put more money into the pot or fold your hand, thus denying your equity. By
playing a raise or fold strategy, you make sure your range is well protected and can be easily
defended against 3-bets.
   When the action folds to you in the SB, you get to play 62.21% hands. However, unlike the
SB, you don’t get a discount to play your hands and you now have to worry about two players
who might have a re-raising hand. Even with your positional advantage over the blinds, the BN
equilibrium strategy is to open a maximum of 43.4% of hands including all pairs, A2s+, A4o+,
K2s+, Q2s+, J4s+, K8o+, Q9o+, J8o+, T8o+, 98o+, suited connectors and suited gappers. In soft
games, if the blinds are overfolding vs opens, the raising range can be easily expanded to 55-
60% hands, or even more, depending on how bad and passive the blinds are.
   The BN defense strategy against both blinds is very similar (see Diagram 7 and Hand Ranges
36 and 37). You fold a little less against a SB 3-bet because the pot is slightly bigger when SB 3-
bets (27bb) compared to when BB 3-bets (26bb). Since you have position and the blinds can put
in the last bet if you 4-bet them (forcing you to fold your equity) you do better having a polarized
4-betting range consisting of hands with good blockers and reasonable board coverage. If you get
5-bet, your getting in range is 66+, AK+ (it’s important to notice how hands such as 66 are
present in your 4-bet range with a very small frequency at this point, but they are getting in when
you do have them).




                        Diagram 7: BN Response to 3-bet from the Blinds
     Hand Range 36: BN vs SB 3-bet
• 4-bet 8.1% / • Call 48.9% / • Fold 43.1%
                                Hand Range 37: BN vs BB 3-bet
                           • 4-bet 8.6% / • Call 47.3% / • Fold 44.5%


Cutoff
While the CO position may seem similar to the BN, it actually plays quite differently. You now
have to worry not only about the blinds, but also the BN who has position on you and can call or
3-bet as they see fit. So, the total hands you can play from the CO gets reduced to 27.8%. From
the CO, hands such as K2s, Q5s-Q2s, J6s-J4s, A7o-A2o, offsuit connectors and suited gappers
are not strong enough to enter the pot (Hand Range 38).
                                     Hand Range 38: CO RFI
                                • Raise 2.5x: 27.8% / • Fold 72.2%

   When facing 3-bets, if you have position, your strategy involves mostly calling, leaving your
4-betting range very polarized (Diagram 8). However, vs the BN, you are much more
incentivized to 4-bet and try to either take the pot pre-flop or force a low post-flop SPR to reduce
the BN’s positional advantage (Hand Range 39). Playing out of position post-flop makes
realizing your hand’s equity much more difficult, so you are forced to call less and fold more
against the BN than against the blinds (Hand Ranges 40 and 41).
Diagram 8: CO Response to 3-bets
     Hand Range 39: CO vs BN 3-bet
• 4-bet 20.6% / • Call 20.4% / • Fold 59%
      Hand Range 40: CO vs SB 3-bet
• 4-bet 11.1% / • Call 35.8% / • Fold 53.1%
                               Hand Range 41: CO vs BB 3-bet
                         • 4-bet 10.3% / • Call 37.6% / • Fold 52.1%


Hijack
From the HJ you have to worry about four players still to act and two of them have position,
which will limit your ability to play many hands profitably. The total hands you can play at
equilibrium is reduced to 21.4%, trimming down on smaller pairs, the worst offsuit broadways,
suited connectors and weak suited Kx and Qx (Hand Range 42).
                                   Hand Range 42: HJ RFI
                              • Raise 2.5x: 21.4% / • Fold 78.6%

  On average, you fold a lot less against 3-bets when you have position, defending mostly by
calling against the blinds and 4-betting more often when out of position. Also, you get to call
with a wider range against BN 3-bets than against the CO because the BN has a flat calling
range, so their 3-betting range is a lot more polarized than the CO (Table 26 and Diagram 9). In
general, opening ranges have better equity and playability against polarized ranges, making more
hands profitable calls.
                          Table 26: HJ Equities vs 3-bet Ranges




                           Diagram 9: HJ Response to 3-bets

The HJ response to 3-bets is seen in Hand Ranges 43-46.
      Hand Range 43: HJ vs CO 3-bet
• 4-bet 22.2% / • Call 14.5% / • Fold 63.3%
      Hand Range 44: HJ vs BN 3-bet
• 4-bet 21.6% / • Call 20.8% / • Fold 57.6%
      Hand Range 45: HJ vs SB 3-bet
• 4-bet 11.1% / • Call 36.3% / • Fold 52.6%
                                Hand Range 46: HJ vs BB 3-bet
                           • 4-bet 9.6% / • Call 39.1% / • Fold 51.4%


Lojack
The LJ is the position where you start having to be much more careful, playing only 17.1%
hands. If you decide to enter the pot, you have to take on five other players who can play back at
you and three of them have position, hindering your ability to realize equity. You mostly get to
play high equity hands with really good blockers and a small portion of suited connectors and
small pairs for the purposes of board coverage (Hand Range 47).
The LJ response to 3-bets is seen in Diagram 10 and Hand Ranges 48-52.




                                Hand Range 47: LJ RFI
                           • Raise 2.5x 17.1% / • Fold 82.9%
Diagram 10: LJ Response to 3-bets
      Hand Range 48: LJ vs HJ 3-bet
• 4-bet 21.8% / • Call 15.1% / • Fold 63.1%
      Hand Range 49: LJ vs CO 3-bet
• 4-bet 23.8% / • Call 13.8% / • Fold 62.4%
      Hand Range 50: LJ vs BN 3-bet
• 4-bet 21.9% / • Call 23.3% / • Fold 54.9%
      Hand Range 51: LJ vs SB 3-bet
• 4-bet 11.5% / • Call 36.6% / • Fold 51.9%
                                Hand Range 52: LJ vs BB 3-bet
                           • 4-bet 9.5% / • Call 38.8% / • Fold 51.7%



Playing vs 3-bets: General Heuristics
Well-constructed ranges are designed in such a way that they maximize the number of hands that
can be played profitably while remaining unexploitable against the other players at the table. If a
player attempts to play a BN range (~43% hands) from the LJ (~17% hands), they will get
destroyed because they will no longer be able to defend enough of this range (~48%) against the
remaining players. They will have to fold way more than 52% of their range when facing 3-bets
and will also have to call with many marginal hands that will give them a lot of trouble post-flop.
  The only thing that stops players from 3-betting you relentlessly is your ability to 4-bet, as
well as the likelihood of other players coming over the top. You must defend enough of your
range against 3-bets so that Villains are indifferent to 3-betting you with the bottom of their
range (Diagrams 11 and 12).
   You will get 3-bet a lot more often when opening UTG than when opening from the BN
(despite your strong range) due to the number of players yet to act, and your opponents will have
stronger ranges. Defending a wide range is a lot more difficult than defending a tight range, so
you can’t profitably open as many hands from UTG as you can from the BN. If your opponent’s
3-betting range is polarized, more hands in your range will have the right equity to call due to
being dominated less often, leading to better post-flop playability. So, you get to call more of
your range against polarized ranges compared to linear ranges.




                          Diagram 11: Average Response to 3-bet (IP)
                         Diagram 12: Average Response to 3-bet (OOP)

   Suited broadways, suited connectors and pocket pairs make good calling hands. Offsuit
broadways and weak Ax don’t play too well in 3-bet pots because they have very poor equity
realization and bad reverse implied odds and so, in general, they get folded.
   If you think someone is out of line with their 3-bet frequency then, to exploit them, you first
need to assess how they will react to a 4-bet. If they will fold most of the time, you can 4-bet a
polarized range, opting to bluff with hands that have good blockers, such A5s. If the Villain is
likely to call your 4-bet with a wide range and only 5-bet premium hands, the best approach is to
4-bet a linear range so you extract immediate value and have a strong range post-flop. If the
Villain is likely to 5-bet all-in wide, then don’t be afraid to 4-bet/call off with hands such as AQ.
Sometimes they will get your stack but, more often than not, you will get theirs.
   The smaller your opponent’s 3-bet size, the more hands in your range you need to defend in
order to remain unexploitable. Against smaller sizes, you should call more hands and,
conversely, the bigger the bet-size, the fewer hands you need to defend.
   Rake effects are reduced in pots that are already inflated by pre-flop action. So when deciding
to enter the pot by 3-betting or 4-betting, the main concern should be the ranges and equities in
play.
   When facing a 5-bet, your general getting in range should be TT+ and AK.
   Once the action gets to you after an open raise and a 3-bet, in general you will 4-bet or fold.
Splitting your range into cold calling and cold 4-betting presents problematic issues that give
away information about your hand. Cold calling also allows active players to realize their equity
by calling many hands they would have folded vs a 4-bet, so the best approach is to simply cold
4-bet all of your continuing range or ~3% hands vs tight ranges and ~6% hands vs wide ranges
(Hand Range 53).




        Hand Range 53: BB Cold 4-betting Versus: • LJ & HJ / • CO & BN / • BN & SB


General Strategy When Facing 3-bets vs Each Position
Your response to a 3-bet should vary depending upon which position the 3-bet comes from
(Diagram 13).
                 Diagram 13: Average Response vs 3-bet (SB RFI not Included)

Versus HJ 3-bet

Since the HJ is playing a 3-bet or fold strategy vs the LJ, their range will be very linear and
overlap considerably with the the LJ range. The LJ’s best response is to mostly defend by 4-
betting to reduce their positional disadvantage by reducing the SPR and getting the HJ to fold
some of their equity.

Versus CO 3-bet

Against the CO, you can 4-bet slightly wider than vs the HJ because the CO 3-bet range is
slightly wider than the HJ 3-betting range. Also, you are happier getting all-in with JJ and TT
pre-flop.

Versus BN 3-bet

The BN 3-bet range is more polarized than that of the HJ and CO because the BN has a small
calling range, which means more hands in your range have the right equity to call the 3-bet. Your
4-betting range starts to get more polarized and middling hands like AQs, AJs and KQs get
called more often.

Versus SB 3-bet

You have position against the SB so you don’t need to 4-bet as often as you do against the other
positions. Now the only hands that really want to get all-in pre-flop are AA, KK and AKs. High
equity hands such as suited broadways mostly want to call. So, pick the suited broadways and
next-tier suited hands as your 4-bet bluffs. Premium pairs such as QQ and JJ like seeing flops, so
they are 4-bet less often.

Versus BB 3-bet

The BB 3-betting range is polar and you have position, so your main defense will be to call and
play post-flop in position with a solid range. You can start to slow play AA a small percentage of
the time when you are in the HJ. Your 4-betting range against the BB is polarized and some of
your frequent bluffs are A5s-A3s, AQo-ATo, some suited Kx. Suited broadways, suited
connectors and big pairs make great calls because they play well in 3-bet pots and will realize a
lot of their equity.



General Guidelines Playing Versus Open
Raises
In this section we will discuss GTO 3-betting and exploitative 3-betting.


GTO 3-betting
When playing against tough players who you know have sound RFI strategies and will defend
correctly against 3-bets, you should try to stick to equilibrium 3-betting strategies and, if
possible, use some sort of randomization to help stay balanced. Furthermore, you must be careful
not to get exploited, meaning you must defend your 3-bets correctly against 4-bets.
   When considering 3-betting, you need to assess the strength of Villain’s range. The stronger
their range, the stronger hands you should pick as bluffs (you must pick stronger hands to use as
a bluff vs the LJ than vs the BN).
   If you have a flat calling range (mostly from BN or when IP), then your 3-bet range has to be
polarized because you are flatting high equity hands that don’t want to get 4-bet. Therefore, your
3-betting range will consist of your best hands plus the next tier of hands that are not great calls,
have equity or good blockers and can offer good board coverage.
   If you don’t have a flat calling range (mostly in the HJ, CO and SB), then your 3-betting range
must be linear. If you are playing a 3-bet or fold only strategy, you want to put only your best
hands in the 3-betting range and fold everything else.
   When you want to split your range into a calling range and a re-raising range, if stack depths
are such that the Villain can re-raise all-in, you want your re-raising range to be polarized. This is
because you want to put all high equity hands that you don’t want to re-raise/fold in your flatting
range.


Exploitative 3-betting
When you suspect Villain is a weak player and or is opening more hands than they should, you
should try to exploit them by increasing your 3-betting frequencies. However, you must be
careful if there are other active players in the hand because if they pick up on what you are
doing, they can start cold 4-betting wider and exploit you, even if the weak player never realizes
you are exploiting them.
   The best way to assess quickly if a Villain might be over-folding to 3-bets is to use MDF and
the Alpha number.


Example
Game: Live Cash Game
Effective Stack: $500
Players: 8
Blinds: $2/$5 (no ante)
Pre-flop: The action folds to the SB who raises to $15. You have seen him make some
questionable opens with Q3o and 64o from SB before, so you estimate they may be opening
approximately 76% hands (Hand Range 54).
                           Hand Range 54: Villain’s SB Range

Hero is in the BB with K♦2♠.
Can Hero profitably exploit this Villain by 3-bet bluffing with K♦2♠?
Using the Alpha number equation, if you 3-bet Villain to $45, you risk $40 to win $20:
  Villain’s full range (76.47% hands) contains 1,014 combos.




  So, if Villain is defending with fewer than 334.62 combos, you have an immediately profitable
bluff.
 Hand Range 55: SB Defense vs BB (350 combos) [Fishy Player] • Defended 34.5% / • Folded
                                        65.5%

   You can see in Hand Range 55 that the SB defending range contains 350 combos, so you
don’t have an immediately profitable bluff with ATC, but your hand, K♦2♠, has a valuable
blocker to Villain’s continuing range. The K♦ blocks continuing hands such as AK, KK, K6s+,
and KTo+. By having the K♦ blocker in your hand, Villain’s defending range decreases from 350
to 324 combos, making your 3-bet bluff now show an immediate profit.
   There are two main types of exploitative 3-betting.
  ♦ Polarized 3-betting: If Villain is more likely to 4-bet or fold than to call, you can
    increase your 3-bet range to include more hands that have good blockers to their
    continuing range. For example, AJo, A5s, and KJs can flat call because they are high
    equity hands that you don’t want to 3-bet/fold.

  ♦ Linear 3-betting: If Villain is more likely to call your 3-bets than 4-bet, then you want to
    3-bet a linear range made of high equity hands that also have great post-flop playability
    and will dominate Villain’s flatting range.



Specific Ranges Playing Versus Open Raises
Here we analyse the GTO solutions to playing vs open raises from each position and discuss the
key factors that are implied by the construction of the ranges.


Hijack
The HJ plays a 3-bet/fold strategy with no calling range when facing the LJ’s raise (Hand Range
56). From this position the maximum number of hands you can 3-bet and remain unexploitable is
~8% hands. It might be surprising to the reader that this strategy has a small weight in pocket
pairs such as 88 to 22, because if 88 is clearly better than 22 then why not only 3-bet 88 more
frequently instead of 22? The main reason is that you want to have good post-flop board
coverage and be able to hit sets and other strong hands on many different types of flop texture.
Another reason is that if you only 3-bet specific hands, your opponents will be able to use their
blockers more effectively against you.
   Against a LJ 4-bet, you want to 5-bet ~18.4% of the time, but since you have position, your
main response is still going to be to call with most of your continuing range, slowplaying AA
52% of the time and just calling pairs that are weaker than KK. Other hands that like taking flops
are the small suited connectors, AKo (46%), AQs, AJs, KQs and a small fraction of A5s-A4s
(Hand Range 57).
Hand Range 56: HJ vs LJ Open
 • 3-bet 8.1% / • Fold 91.8%
                                 Hand Range 57: HJ vs LJ 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 18.4% / • Call 43.3% / • Fold 38.3%


Cutoff
The CO 3-betting range vs LJ open is slightly wider than the HJ vs LJ one because now there is
one fewer Villain to worry about (Hand Range 58). Still, the LJ range is strong enough by itself,
so you only get to 3-bet 0.5% more often.
  The hands that really want to get all-in pre-flop are KK and AKs (100%). QQ only wants to
get all-in ~7% of the time. AA is slowplayed 48% of the time, and AKo gets called 46% of the
time. A5s calls 39% and A4s calls 30% (Hand Range 59).




                 Hand Range 58: CO vs LJ Open • 3-bet 8.6% / • Fold 91.4%
                               Hand Range 59: CO vs LJ 4-bet
                      • 5-bet All-in 17.5% / • Call 45.1% / • Fold 37.4%

   Against the HJ, the CO can 3-bet a wider range than vs the LJ because the HJ is opening
~21% hands, while LJ is opening only ~17% hands. You widen your 3-betting range to include
hands such as A9s (61%), QTs (30%), and JTs (16%) and by increasing weights in the other
threshold hands (Hand Range 60).
   Since your 3-betting range vs the HJ is wider, you need to defend a few extra hands against
the 4-bet to remain unexploitable, so now you also call KJs (100%), ATs (24%), and KTs (21%)
(Hand Range 61).
Hand Range 60: CO vs HJ Open
  • 3-bet 9.9% / • Fold 90.1%
                                Hand Range 61: CO vs HJ 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 16.1% / • Call 48.2% / • Fold 35.8%


Button
The BN is the only position that doesn’t have to worry about being out of position post-flop if
someone else decides to enter the pot. Unlike the LJ, HJ, and CO, the BN has a calling range vs
opens, so the BN 3-betting range is more polarized (Diagram 14).
                            Diagram 14: BN Defending Frequencies

   Your flatting range is made of hands that have good post-flop playability and offer good board
coverage. You protect your calling range by slowplaying hands such as QQ (22%), JJ (52%), TT
(59%), 99 (72%), and AKo (23%), as well as hands that can call against squeezes and play post-
flop such as AQs (30%), AJs (37%), ATs (71%), KQs (65%), KJs (67%), KTs (30%) and QJs
(41%) (Hand Range 62).
                                 Hand Range 62: BN vs LJ Open
                            • 3-bet 7.3% / • Call 6.9% / • Fold 85.8%

   When you see some singularities such as K6s-K5s and 53s in Hand Range 62 it’s important to
notice that these outliers are more likely to be due to convergence in the GTO solution than some
“groundbreaking” discovery, so in practice you should be fine simply ignoring them.
   At this point, the LJ 4-betting range is strong enough that you are fine 5-betting a range of KK,
AKs, AKo (64%), AA (44%), and QQ (5%) from the BN as LJ should still continue ~58% of the
time vs the shove. Again, since you have position, the bulk of your range is defended by calling a
lot of hands that have good equity vs LJ 4-betting range (Hand Range 63).
                                 Hand Range 63: BN vs LJ 4-bet
                        • 5-bet All-in 19.4% / • Call 40% / • Fold 40.6%

    Against HJ raises, the BN flatting frequency goes down a little bit because you now have a
little less protection against squeezes, given the blinds can 3-bet more vs the HJ than vs the LJ.
At the same time, the BN can 3-bet more vs the HJ, so your 3-betting frequency increases 1.5%
and your overall folding frequency decreases 1.2%. A few hands that get added to your 3-betting
range are strong blocker hands such as QJo (16%), and ATo (13%) (Hand Range 64).
    Against HJ 4-bets, the BN starts 5-betting QQ (38%) and incorporates more calling, using
hands such as AQo (66%), KTs, QJs (38%), JTs (96%), A5s (96%), A4s (40%), A3s (17%), and
54s (Hand Range 65).




                            Hand Range 64: BN vs HJ Open
                       • 3-bet 8.8% / • Call 6.5% / • Fold 84.6%
                                Hand Range 65: BN vs HJ 4-bet
                        • 5-bet All-in 18.4% / • Call 41.6% / • Fold 40%

    Notice that this chart only represents hand frequencies and not exactly how often the
  hand is in the range. So, for example, 54s should be read as a call 100% of the time when
  you have it, but if you look back at the BN vs the HJ 3-betting chart, 54s is only being 3-bet
  4% of the time, so you barely have it in your range when you face the 4-bet.

 Against a CO open, the BN calling range continues to shrink because the blinds will squeeze
more often vs the CO than vs the HJ and LJ. The BN 3-betting range vs the CO increases to
11.7% and the folding frequency decreases to 82.3%. The BN 3-betting range now incorporates
more suited Ax and offsuit broadways, focusing more on high card value (Hand Range 66).
   The CO 4-betting range is wider and a little more polarized than that of the HJ, so you can
defend more of your range by calling. At this point, AA slowplays 100% of the time. You also
increase the calling frequency of hands such as AQo, QJs, JTs, and K9s (68%). You begin to
incorporate 4-bets with JJ (40%) and increase the 4-betting frequency of hands such as AKo
(96%), and QQ (66%) (Hand Range 67).




                               Hand Range 66: BN vs CO Open
                          • 3-bet 11.7% / • Call 5.4% / • Fold 82.3%
                                 Hand Range 67: BN vs CO 4-bet
                        • 5-bet All-in 17.1% / • Call 45.2% / • Fold 37.3%


Small Blind
From the SB vs the LJ, you play a 3-bet or fold strategy similar to play from the HJ and CO,
despite getting a discount on the call. Calling puts the SB in a bad situation where the BB
remains active and can squeeze, forcing SB off their equity. Alternatively, the BB can call and
realize their post-flop equity, capturing a portion of the pot. SB equity realization post-flop out of
position against two players is quite bad, particularly with high SPRs. All of this, combined with
the effect of the rake, makes calling from the SB a losing proposition (Hand Range 68).
   In response to a 4-bet, a good 5-betting range is AKs, AA (63%), AKo (53%), QQ (7%) and JJ
(10%). The calling range consists of all other pairs, suited connectors, AQs, AJs, ATs (21%) and
A5s (44%). Small suited connectors and mid pocket pairs make better calls than hands such as
AQo, Kxs, and Qxs because they unblock Villain’s bluffs even if they have less raw equity
(Hand Range 69).




                                Hand Range 68: SB vs LJ Open
                                 • 3-bet 7.3% / • Fold 92.7%
                                 Hand Range 69: SB vs LJ 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 20.6% / • Call 45.7% / • Fold 33.8%

   The SB can 3-bet a wider range vs the HJ than vs the LJ, incorporating hands such as A9s
(23%), KQo (9%), K9s (10%), J9s (9%) and adding more weight to the threshold hands (Hand
Range 70).
   Since you are 3-betting slightly wider vs the HJ than vs the LJ, you have to call a little more
often vs the 4-bet to remain unexploitable by incorporating some calls with hands such as AQo
(5%), KQs (48%), KJs (54%), and KTs (28%) (Hand Range 71).
Hand Range 70: SB vs HJ Open
 • 3-bet 8.7% / • Fold 91.3%
                                 Hand Range 71: SB vs HJ 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 20%% / • Call 46.8% / • Fold 32.8%

  The SB can 3-bet 2.2% more hands vs the CO compared to the HJ by 3-betting hands such as
AJo (47%), A8s (15%), T9s (45%) and adding more weight to the threshold hands (Hand Range
72).
  The SB should slowplay AA slightly more frequently vs the CO because the CO 4-betting
range is more polarized than that of the HJ and the LJ, allowing you to call profitably with more
hands such as AQo (52%), A3s, and JTs (55%). Suited wheel Ax hands make better calls than
broadways and Ax with higher kickers such as A9s because they block AA and AK and unblock
bluffs such as KJs, KTs, K9s, J9s while retaining good post-flop playability. This is the point
where, for the first time, we see a 5-betting range include some non-premium hands as bluffs
such as ATs and A5s. The reason for this is that the EP and the MP 4-bet ranges are too strong
and too blocker heavy. The LP 4-bet ranges vs the blinds are less centered around blockers and
this starts to improve the EV of jamming these blocker-type hands. ATs and A5s are the highest
equity bluff hands against very strong ranges (Hand Range 73).




                               Hand Range 72: SB vs CO Open
                                • 3-bet 10.9% / • Fold 89.1%
                               Hand Range 73: SB vs CO 4-bet
                      • 5-bet All-in 18.6% / • Call 52.2% / • Fold 29.2%

   Against the BN, the SB can 3-bet 15% hands, adding hands such as ATo (43%), KTo (6%),
QJo (3%), A7s, Q9s, T8s (71%), 98s (21%), 87s (9%), 76s (86%) as well as giving more weight
to the threshold hands (Hand Range 74).
Hand Range 74: SB vs BN Open
  • 3-bet 15% / • Fold 85%
                               Hand Range 75: SB vs BN 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 17.3% / • Call 56% / • Fold 26.5%

   The BN 4-betting range is very polarized, so the SB is less incentivized to 5-bet and more
incentivized to call, choosing to slowplay AA 100% of the time. The SB 5-betting range is KK,
QQ, AK, JJ (29%), TT (27%), and A5s (74%), while the calling range is 55+, 76s+ AQo, ATs+,
KTs+, A4s, A3s, AJo (37%), A9s (67%), A5s (74%), K9s (74%), QTs (72%), and K6s (Hand
Range 75).


Big Blind
Big blind defense strategies are probably the most important strategies to master, since most pots
play out with someone raising and the BB defending. If you were to fold all of your hands from
the BB, your Win Rate would be -100bb/100 from this position. Therefore, defending as many
hands as possible in a profitable manner will help reduce the money you lose in the blinds,
boosting your long-term winnings. Furthermore, if you fold too many hands from the BB, you
quickly become a target for aggressive players looking to steal, whereas if you defend
aggressively and play well post-flop, players will instead become wary of messing with your
blinds. Diagram 15 shows the frequencies with which the BB should defend.




                            Diagram 15: BB Defending Frequencies

   Against LJ opens, you need to defend tightly because the LJ opening range is quite strong.
There are not many speculative hands that will have the right equity and equity realization to call
profitably. Additionally, the LJ range can easily defend against 3-bets, so you can’t go too crazy
with 3-bet bluffs. Offsuit broadways such as AQo-ATo don’t make good 3-bets because you are
forced to fold them vs a 4-bet and their playability is generally poor in 3-bet pots, especially
from out of position. On the other hand, suited broadways are great 3-betting hands, followed by
suited Ax, Kx, suited connectors and suited gappers. The BB calling range consists mostly of the
best offsuit broadways, all other pocket pairs, suited connectors, suited gappers, Axs and Kxs
that are not 3-bet (Hand Range 76).
  It may be surprising that hands as strong as A9o always get folded whereas hands such as K2s
get called. The main reason for this is that offsuit disconnected hands tend to struggle to realize
equity, particularly when playing against tight ranges.
  When facing a LJ 4-bet, the BB 5-bets AA (61%), KK (57%), AKs, AKo (54%), QQ (16%)
and A5s (38%) and can call all other pairs, ATs+, JTs (75%), T9s-65s, and 54s (64%) (Hand
Range 77).




                                Hand Range 76: BB vs LJ Open
                           • 3-bet 5.8% / • Call 22.8% / • Fold 71.2%
                                 Hand Range 77: BB vs LJ 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 21.4% / • Call 42.2% / • Fold 36.4%

   Against HJ opens, the BB can defend a little wider than vs the CO and increase the 3-betting
frequency by adding weight to the threshold hands (Hand Range 78).
   The BB response to a HJ 4-bet is similar to the response to the LJ. The main difference is that
in order to maintain the proper defending frequency, you need to call a few more combos
because the 3-betting range vs the HJ is slightly wider than vs the LJ. You expand your calls to
include some hands such as KJs (52%), KTs (17%), while JJ gets 5-bet instead of QQ, probably
due to some blocker effects, although, as mentioned previously, these small singularities are not
something that should be a huge concern for the reader. Again, the strategies presented are to
help you develop a general idea of how to approach these common spots (Hand Range 79).




                               Hand Range 78: BB vs HJ Open
                          • 3-bet 7.6% / • Call 23.9% / • Fold 68.5%
                                Hand Range 79: BB vs HJ 4-bet
                        • 5-bet All-in 21% / • Call 42.5% / • Fold 36.5%

   Against the CO, the BB can defend 3.9% more hands. Both 3-bet and calling ranges get
slightly wider by adding more weight to the threshold hands. It is worth noting how many offsuit
hands such as K8o and Q9o simply get folded vs a CO open. As mentioned previously, offsuit
hands with low connectivity struggle to realize equity post-flop OOP, especially with deep stacks
(Hand Range 80).
   The CO 4-betting strategy vs the BB is a lot more polarized than the LJ and HJ strategy, so the
BB responds by calling more hands and slowplaying AA slightly more often (53%). The BB
calling range gets expanded by incorporating more hands such as KQs, 44, AQo (62%), A5s,
A9s (27%), and A4s (86%) (Hand Range 81).




                             Hand Range 80: BB vs CO Open
                        • 3-bet 9.7% / • Call 25.7% / • Fold 64.6%
                                Hand Range 81: BB vs CO 4-bet
                          • 5-bet 18.8% / • Call 49.6% / • Fold 31.5%

   Against the BN, the BB 3-bets a very linear range and plays in an overall more aggressive
manner compared to the strategy employed when facing the earlier positions. The BB now 3-bets
13.4% hands while calling with most suited hands, offsuit Ax, connectors and broadways. The
BN range is wide enough that now the BB can call many more hands compared to all the other
positions, as the BN’s ability to barrel and overbet very aggressively is downgraded due to the
strong hands being diluted (Hand Range 82).
      Hand Range 82: BB vs BN Open
• 3-bet 13.4% / • Call 43.4% / • Fold 43.2%
                                 Hand Range 83: BB vs BN 4-bet
                        • 5-bet All-in 19.4% / • Call 54.1% / • Fold 26.5%

   Against a BN 4-bet, the BB defends mostly by calling because the BN should be quite
polarized. The BB 5-betting strategy involves jamming AA (32%), AK, KK, QQ (55%), JJ
(32%), TT (31%), 99 (7%), A5s (45%), and A4s (43%). The calling range is expanded to include
hands that have great equity and equity realization vs the BN 4-betting range, such as A7s+,
K9s+, AQo, A5s-A3s, all suited connectors, and other pocket pairs (Hand Range 83).
   Due to being in position, the BB 3-betting strategy vs the SB open raise is very polarized,
including the best hands that can either 5-bet jam or are happy to call 4-bets in position. The rest
of the range consists of hands that have good blockers and good board coverage that don’t mind
being folded to a 4-bet, such as Axo and K4o+. The BB flat calling range consists mostly of
medium strength hands that can realize a lot of equity playing in position. The BB folding range
is made up of the absolute worst hands that really get punished by rake, making it impossible to
profit with them (Hand Range 84).




                                Hand Range 84: BB vs SB Open
                          • 3-bet 16.3% / • Call 48.3% / • Fold 35.4%
                                Hand Range 85: BB vs SB 4-bet
                       • 5-bet All-in 12.6% / • Call 46.2% / • Fold 41.2%

  The SB 4-betting range is very polarized. Since the BB has position, the SB is incentivized to
call many hands while 5-betting infrequently. They should slowplay hands such as AA (100%),
KK (65%), QQ (34%), AKs (87%) and JJ (28%) and call all hands that have some playability.
They should fold the bottom portion of their polar range (Hand Range 85).
  The BB wants to raise a semipolar range, with hands that can call in position vs a limp/raise
and hands that are easy raise/folds. The BB will only 4-bet about 7% of hands, mixing up strong
hands such as TT+, AK and some Ax and Kx blocker-type hands (Hand Range 86-87).
Hand Range 86: BB vs SB Limp
 • 3.5x 40.6% / • Check 59.4%
              Hand Range 87: BB vs SB L/R
        • 4-bet 7.3% / • Call 41.3% / • Fold 51.4%




06




THE THEORY OF
TOURNAMENT PLAY
While cash games and tournaments may appear similar, they are actually quite different. Cash
games are generally played 6-handed with no antes and 100bb stacks, whereas multi-table
tournaments are generally played 9-handed with antes and various stack sizes throughout the
event. These factors, plus the difference in payment structure, make poker tournaments a
completely different animal to cash games.



Variance
Variance is one of the most commonly-used terms in the poker world, yet most people don’t
fully understand it. In statistics, variance is a measure of how far a set of numbers are spread out
from their average value. In poker, variance is a measure of how far actual results spread out
from expectation (EV) (Diagram 16).




                              Diagram 16: Typical Variance Graph
   Low variance means results are spread closer to the average and high variance means results
are spread farther away from the average.


How is Variance Calculated?
If you use poker tracking software, it can report the standard deviation of your own results.
Variance is simply the square of the standard deviation. If you know the standard deviation S,
you can calculate the variance as follows:




  Alternatively, it can be calculated by hand using this formula:




  Where:




  For example, in a small data sample with only three data points such as (1, 6, 11):




  Then:
  And the standard deviation S would be:




Poker Applications
Let’s say Hero has a sample of 100,000 poker hands played in online cash games. If you divide
this sample into chunks of 100 hands each, you can calculate Hero’s win rate on each chunk by
simply adding the big blinds won and subtracting the big blinds lost by all 100 hands. This
process will produce a total of 1,000 different win rates Hero experienced throughout the
100,000 hand sample. The more Hero’s win rate varies in each chunk of 100 hands, the bigger
the standard deviation will be.
   Returning to the variance formula:
  We can see that the variance is affected by two main variables:


  ♦ The number of hands dealt. Since the number of hands is located in the denominator of
    the fraction, the conclusion is that the larger this number, the smaller the total variance
    will be, and the smaller the sample, the higher the variance. So, players who play a lot of
    volume will experience less variance than the occasional players.

  ♦ The spread of the win rates between each of the 100 hand chunks and Hero’s average win
    rate. Since this number is located in the numerator of the fraction the conclusion is that
    the wider the spread, the higher the variance.


  Different games and game formats will have a different spread between their actual win rates
and the average win rate and therefore experience different variance and different standard
deviation.




                        Table 27: Standard Deviations in Different Games

  The values in Table 27 are according to the pokerdope.com variance calculator


Why is it Important to Understand Variance?
Understanding variance helps you to better interpret your poker results, estimate reasonable
downswings, practice game selection and determine wise bankroll management.
   As seen in Chapter 4, player win rates can be used to estimate earnings over a period of time,
but that alone doesn’t give the full picture. Because of variance, actual results often deviate from
expectation, so we need a variance calculator such as pokerdope.com/poker-variance-calculator
to be able to properly plan our games and bankroll in preparation for possible downswings.
   Using the PokerDope variance calculator we can estimate how results may deviate from
expectation, simulating two different NLH cash players over different hand samples (Tables 28
and 29).
                           Table 28: Player A: Win Rate = 2.5bb/100




                            Table 29: Player B: Win Rate = 5bb/100

  Comparing both players results it can be confirmed that, as expected, the standard deviation
decreases as we increase the sample. While having a higher win rate does not affect the standard
deviation, it does reduce the probability of loss (going broke over the sample) very dramatically.


Variance in Tournaments
Some readers may have heard that poker tournaments have more variance than cash games, but
why is that?
  Tournament players are competing for a payout related to the position they finish in the
tournament and thus tournament chips have no direct monetary value and cannot be cashed. So
even if a player manages to accumulate a lot of tournament chips, there is no material gain unless
they can squeeze themselves into the positions that get paid, usually meaning the top 15-18% of
the field. So, even if a tournament player has a high win rate of something like 10bb/100,
contrary to cash games there is no way to know how much money they can make after playing
some number of hands, or if they will make any money at all.
   To understand why there is more variance in tournaments than in cash games we can consider
a simple example. Suppose you lose a flip for 50bb in a cash game. It doesn’t matter if you lost it
at the beginning of your session or after 10 hours of play. You are still losing the same amount of
money. Furthermore, in the cash game, you can always reload and get back to the exact same
stack you had before you lost. In a tournament, if you lose a flip for 50bb after playing in an
online tournament for 10 hours, it is not the same as losing the flip at the beginning of your
session because, after 10 hours, you are going to be very close to the final table with over 90% of
the field already eliminated. Your stack is worth way more than just your tournament entry, and
if you bust or lose a substantial amount of your stack, you cannot simply reload and replay the
same game and the same situation. Instead, you have to start over and, even after another 10
hours, you may not find yourself deep in another tournament in a similar situation. This results in
the fact that losing a flip deep in a tournament may be worth hundreds of thousands of dollars in
equity, which drastically increases variance.
   Given that is the case, is there some way to reduce variance in tournaments? We will see…



Poker Tournament Metrics
A poker player’s win rate is a measure of how good they are at making chips. This works very
well in cash games because chips have direct monetary value, so a player with a higher win rate
than another player at the same games can be said to be better. Or, at the very least, they can be
expected to make more money in the long run. However, in tournaments there is no direct
correlation, so a player with a high win rate can make less money than a player with a lower win
rate. So having a high win rate in tournaments tells us how good the player is at accumulating
chips, but not necessarily how good they are at winning money.
   Therefore, for measuring a tournament player’s skill we need a different set of metrics. For
online players, it is easy to track results because websites such as www.sharkscope.com keep
track of all the tournaments played at the most popular sites and offer many very useful metrics.
For live players, it is more difficult to get an idea of real skill, as the sample of games played is
smaller, and the only metric that is often recorded is total earnings.


Total Cashes/Earnings
This is by far the most famous metric in the poker world, although not as important in itself as
people often think. This is because you should deduct from this number all the expenses, losses
and taxes to really know how much money a poker player is up. For example, if a player cashes
for $100,000 during a tournament series such as the World Series of Poker (WSOP) but spent
$60,000 in tournaments buy-ins without cashing and had $20,000 in traveling expenses, they
would only profit $20,000 (and that is pre-tax). Of course, cashes are important because clearly a
player who never cashes can’t be a winner, but this metric by itself isn’t enough to measure skill
level.


Profit
Profit refers to the total money a player is up after deducting their loses. This number is
significantly more valuable than total cashes. For example, if a player’s total earnings are $2
million, but they have spent $3 million in tournament buy-ins, they are actually down $1 million.
However, again, this number by itself can be misleading in relation to a player’s skill. For
example, a losing player can be down a lot of money over a long period of time but then get
lucky in a very large tournament, resulting in a hefty lifetime profit.


In the Money% (ITM)
ITM is the frequency a player cashes and is in the money. For online MTTs, this number
(excluding bounty tournaments) is usually around 15-18% for winning players. Lower than that
generally means that players are way too active during money bubbles or overly aggressive in
the early stages of the tournament. Conversely, a higher ITM generally indicates playing too
passively during money bubbles and passing up on too many spots. Squeezing into the money in
exchange for missing the opportunity to build a big stack is often detrimental. In live
tournaments, ITM% is a lot higher than online because, as explained before, the games tend to be
softer, and so some players can achieve an ITM% of 30-50%.


Total Return on Investment (ROI)
Total ROI is a more useful metric than Profit or Total Cashes, but can still be misleading if used
in a vacuum.
   For example, let’s say a player plays 2,000 $109 online MTTs in one year, making the total
cost of investment $218,000. If they cash for $300,000 with a profit of $82,000, the Total ROI
would be:
Average ROI
Average ROI is calculated independently for each tournament played and then the results are
averaged. This metric says a lot more than the other metrics about a player’s skill relative to the
fields they play
   For example, let’s say there is a particularly bad player who plays a total of 1,999 $109 online
MTTs during a year and he loses all of them. So, they decide to take a shot at a large-field
$1,050 event and get first place for $300k.
   Now let’s think of a different type of player who has consistently won in the $109 tournaments
with several final deep runs and final tables. After playing 1,999 games they are up $301,050 and
so also decide to play the large-field $1,050 event. However, they suffer a bad beat and don’t
even cash. So, their winnings after 2,000 games are $300k.
   If we calculate both players’ Total ROI, the result would be the exact same for both the good
player and the bad player who got lucky:




  However, if we calculate the Average ROI for the bad player, we get a very different result:
   By analyzing a player’s Average ROI, we can get a better understanding of whether they are
actually beating poker in the long term. The previous example is, of course, extreme as even the
worst players will cash some of their tournaments, get deep and make final tables with some
frequency, but it illustrated the point.
   However, having a high Average ROI doesn’t guarantee a player will make money after
playing a number of games and, also as we saw, having a negative Average ROI doesn’t
guarantee a player will lose money after playing a number of games. This is due to the high
variance inherent to MTTs.



Decreasing Variance and Increasing
Profitability in MTTs
The two main ways of decreasing variance while increasing your profitability in MTTs are to
increase your Average ROI and to increase your volume. First, you should focus on increasing
your Average ROI because it’s pointless to put in a lot of volume if you can’t even beat the
games, so you should only increase your volume once you are certain you can beat the games
you want to play.
   Another way to increase profitability is to play higher stakes, although this will also increase
your variance because, in general, the higher the stakes, the tougher the games. So, you can
expect your ROI to be reduced as you move up in stakes. Also, there aren’t nearly as many high
stakes online tournaments as there are low-mid stakes tournaments, so the volume a high stakes
online MTT player can put in on a yearly basis is limited and that increases variance. Playing
fast/turbo tournaments can help increase volume, but the possible ROI in them is also lower than
regular-speed games due to having less time to extract value from weaker opponents, with most
of the play taking place pre-flop with shallow stacks. Bounty tournaments are good to reduce
variance, but your EV in them is lower than regular MTTs because a portion of the prize pool is
taken away for the bounties, and weaker players, who are less likely to win the tournaments, will
capture some of that bounty pool by knocking out some players before busting. On the other
hand, for these same reasons, bounty tournaments favor weaker players.


Increasing Your Volume
Live MTTs are particularly attractive as they offer higher ROIs than their similar buy-in online
counterparts due to the softer fields. However, at the same time, variance is a lot higher in live
MTTs compared to online because of the low volume. So, a good way to increase your volume is
to play online poker (assuming online players play multiple tables and, in general, more games
than live players).
   For new players, I recommend a ratio of 50% play time and 50% study time. Gaining in-game
experience is vitally important because there are many aspects of poker that can really only be
learned by playing. So, for new players, volume isn’t about making money, but instead about
getting proficient with the practical and theoretical aspects of the game and so the focus should
be on study. However, for winning players I recommend a ratio of 80% play time and 20% study
time. After a player’s ROI is high enough, putting in a lot of study time won’t have a high impact
on their bottom line but, at the same time, if a player completely stops studying, their poker skills
will stagnate while their opponents keep improving. Slowly but surely, they will become worse
relative to the field, thus the need to continuously improve. My personal ratio for the last few
years has been the opposite, 20% play time and 80% study time, which is not something I’d
recommend to people who like winning money! I just happen to enjoy coaching and theory
work, such as writing GTO books and articles, a lot more than I enjoy playing. Still, I plan on
putting in a lot more volume in the near future, playing both live and online tournaments, as well
as cash games.


Increasing Your ROI
The easiest way to increase your ROI is to play lower stakes which implies playing against worse
opponents. The toughest way is to become better than your opposition. The tricky part is figuring
out how to actually do it.
   The first thing to do is to make sure you can win chips from your opponents. It’s tough to get
deep in tournaments if you can’t accumulate chips by constantly making +EV decisions, so you
need to know how to play the game well, which means learning about pre-flop and post-flop
strategies at different stack depths, pot odds, equity and all the other concepts discussed in this
book. However, as mentioned before, succeeding at tournaments requires more than simply
being able to accumulate chips.
   Tournaments are more of an art than a science. I have often seen cash game players talk down
to top MTT players and even call them names such as “donkament players” and yet these same
cash players are unable to thrive in MTTs themselves. Even I am guilty of having done this in
the past, thinking that all that was required to crush the games was to learn GTO and that was the
main reason I got so involved in poker theory in the first place. Of course, being a GTO wizard
helps to play better poker, but there are a number of soft skills that top MTT players need to
develop in order to succeed. These include the understanding of tournament life, money bubbles,
the way the different stages of the tournament change equilibrium strategies, a deep
understanding of population tendencies, not to mention live reads, tells, bankroll management
and mental game.
   It was while writing this book that I found the most important game theory concept and I’ll
share it with you now

    GTO poker is not about balance, it is about exploitation. Equilibrium strategies arise
  when two players are maximally exploiting each other, thus there is no need for balance
  when your opponents are unaware of what you are doing or are incapable of counter-
  exploiting you even if they knew exactly what you are up to.

   Even though this realization might seem superfluous, fully understanding this concept helped
me change my mindset at its core. I used to try to play good poker, to play well. Now I’m just
trying to run over my opponents. Tournament poker is all about exploitative play, and this is why
guys like Daniel Negreanu and Phil Hellmuth are among the most successful tournament players
in poker history, even though they are not necessarily the most versed in poker theory. Daniel
can talk his opponents into checking down AA on Qxx when he holds top pair and Hellmuth can
fold AK pre-flop vs AA from a short stack while later running a crazy bluff against Jungleman,
making him fold trips and giving him the King of the Hill title.
   This is also the reason why Fedor Holz took the world by storm, winning all the high rollers
and super high rollers before retiring to pursue other ventures. He said in an interview that he
doesn’t think he is particularly talented at poker but he surrounded himself with very smart
people and he became part of a great community that helped him improve his technical skills.
What makes him different from other players in the German team is his ability to put the theory
into practice, to adapt more optimally than his opponents and to exploit weaknesses.
   The GTO principles and strategies discussed in this book can help players improve their game,
avoid fundamental mistakes and make better decisions. However, there is more to winning in
poker than just playing well. So, my advice to increase your ROI is to study poker theory but
also focus on how to put it into practice. Study your opponents and never be afraid of making a
bad play or looking stupid, just like Daniel, Phil and Fedor aren’t afraid to, even when playing
the biggest games when the whole world is watching.



Understanding Tournament Metrics and
Results
Table 30 uses the pokerdope.com Tournament Variance Calculator to simulate the results of
players with different average ROIs and analyzes their possible results after playing 2,000 $109
Online MTTs with an average field of 300 players.




          Table 30: Simulation of Variation of Results After 2,000 $109 Online MTTs

   Even after a sample of 2,000 tournaments it is still possible for Player A, with an average ROI
of -25%, to make some profit. Player B, with an ROI of -10%, can have a best run of $36,865,
which is more money than Player D’s expectation of $21,800, who has an ROI of 10%. Player C
is a breakeven player who will lose money ~50% of the time, yet their results can be anywhere
from -$56,300 to $88,690. If Player B, with -10% ROI, has their best run, and Player F, with
50% ROI, has their worst run, they both will have very similar results of ~$36k winnings.
  If we base our judgment of a player’s skill only on the money won, we could mistakenly
assume that Players B and F have the exact same skill or that Player C is a very large winner,
when in reality they are just a breakeven player who ran good (this is the reality of many players
who have experienced some level of success). The truth is that many players who have won a lot
of money are in reality losing players who just ran well. The opposite is also true. There are
some great players who simply experienced their worst possible runs over their short sample and
were forced to quit the game before being able to turn things around. If we use an even lower
sample of 200 games instead of 2,000, this exercise quickly gets out of hand, as shown in Table
31.




            Table 31: Simulation of Variation of Results After 200 $109 Online MTTs

   In a 200 tournament sample, even a solid winner like Player E, who has a 25% ROI, will lose
money 28% of the time, and Player A, with -25% ROI, will sometimes be up $20,000 after
playing 200 tournaments.
   It is easy to lose perspective and to think irrationally highly of yourself after a few victories. In
the hope that it does not happen to you, I am going to share a little story with you.
   I learned to play poker in 2009 and started winning small amounts of money in local casinos.
In 2010, I final tabled a tournament that brought me $2,000, so I decided to quit my job in a call
center and use my $2,000 plus a couple credit cards as a bankroll (probably a lot of you are face-
palming yourself right now). Towards the end of 2010, I played one and only one $300 MTT
satellite to win a $17,000 package to 2011 PokerStars Caribbean Adventure in the Bahamas, so I
was feeling like the king of the world. After just a year of playing, a couple of nice results and
reading a few books, I was ready to take the world by storm and crush Ivey, Durrrr and the rest
of best players in the world! Or was I?
   I ended up bricking the PCA Main Event and busting my entire bankroll during that
tournament series, including the credit cards, but at least I got some nice pictures of me
swimming with dolphins plus a photo with my all-time hero Daniel Negreanu.
   So, I went broke and, even worse, was now in debt. Somehow, I had $1,000 more available on
a credit card, so I grinded my bankroll back up by playing live cash games in the currency of my
home country. I could not afford to play the fancy $1/$2 USD games anymore. I had to go back
to playing ₡500/₡500, which was roughly $1/$1. So, my bankroll was 10 buy-ins.
   I ran hot once again and managed to build a bankroll of $5,000. This allowed me to repay the
credit cards and still have a bit left over but then, towards the end of 2011, I again got overly
confident and started playing games in USD, “high stakes” $1/$2 and $2/$5 games, despite not
having a sufficient bankroll. I somehow convinced myself that I had just been really unlucky and
that I was a great player (another face-palm). I am sure you already know that I busted my
bankroll yet again. This time, I had to get a job.
   After going broke for the second time, I was completely sick of poker, yet I still blamed bad
luck. I quit poker for a year but the lure of the game eventually proved too much and I tried my
luck in an $11 online rebuy MTT. I managed to win it for $10,000 and then hopped right back
into the $1/$2 games. This time though, I won about $6,000 during December 2012, so my
delusions got reinforced due to my good luck. I told myself, “I was made to play poker, I just
needed to trust myself”, so (of course) in January 2013, I quit my nice job as a financial analyst
as well as college because I had decided that I was going to focus entirely on poker.
   After “going pro”, I had a great start and rapidly turned my $16,000 bankroll into $30,000. I
felt like this time I had really made it, so I started playing $2/$5 on a regular basis and traveled a
few times to other Latin American countries, hoping to win a prestigious Latin American Poker
Tour title and change my life for good. What instead happened was I blasted off most of my
bankroll.
   As a general tip, life does not change when you win a poker tournament or come into money.
If you want to change your life, you have to change your habits. Every single day, small actions
subtly move your life in either the right or wrong direction. I wish I knew this back then!
   At this point in time, I had completely stopped studying the game. I thought I was super-
talented and I had already read the best books anyway. I was overconfident and got a new car,
moved to a nice apartment and started living a lifestyle that I couldn’t afford. Like clockwork, I
again made a lot of mistakes, lent a lot of money to a friend, and when I finally started running
“bad”/stopped sun-running, the inevitable happened.
   In June 2014 I was down to my last $2,000 and had to make a decision. I could either go back
to my day job and forget about poker for good, or lose the fancy apartment and move back in
with my mother, giving me one last shot to try to get a backer for online tournaments and start
from scratch playing micro stakes.
   To cut a long story short, I finally understood that I must have been doing something wrong
and that I wasn’t anywhere as good as I thought I was, so I owned my mistakes and swallowed
my pride. I applied to pocarr.com where I was able to watch numerous training videos and get
coaching from top players. I started studying GTO and then I moved up in stakes very quickly. I
eventually became a coach and, after many ups and downs, by the end of 2018 I can finally say
that I made it. I always dreamt of playing the WSOP Main Event and now I am in the position to
go to Las Vegas every year. I play a lot of high buy-in events, including the main event, and play
$5/$10 and $10/$20 cash games. I could actually play higher, but I am not looking to blast off
my bankroll anymore!
  I wanted to share my story because I think that perhaps if I had found a book that explained
how poker actually works, including concepts such as variance, ROI, EV and win rates, I could
have saved myself a lot of trouble. That said, I can’t really complain because, despite all my
mistakes, I was lucky to get where I am today. And so, while writing my first poker book I can’t
help but to smile and feel humble and grateful for having the opportunity of doing what I love.



MTT Bankroll Management
The first thing you need to do is figure out how much of your net worth you are willing to use as
your bankroll. If you are a professional poker player then your bankroll should be a large
percentage of your net worth, and if you are not a professional player your bankroll should be an
amount you can afford to lose but still large enough for you to care about it.
   Once you know how large your bankroll is, you need to decide which games you can play
with it. I generally suggest keeping at least 200 buy-ins in your bankroll. Of course, the more
buy-ins you have, the lower the probability of going broke. If you really want to minimize the
risk of going broke, 1,000 buy-ins are recommended.
   If you plan on becoming a professional, I recommend you have money that is separate from
your bankroll to cover your living expenses for at least six months. If you want to avoid stressful
monetary situations, you should keep a year’s worth of expenses or even more.
   As you can tell, these bankroll requirements are quite large compared to what many poker
players actually have, unless they get lucky to win a huge tournament early in their career. For
this reason, backing deals are a great opportunity to start playing higher than you otherwise could
yourself. Many backers offer deals where the player keeps half of the wins with makeup,
meaning losses accumulate and have to be paid off before the profit is split. For example, if you
get down $5,000 but then win a tournament for $10,000, $5,000 would cover the makeup and the
other $5,000 would be split, giving you $2,500 and the backer $2,500. If you won the first
tournament you played for $10,000, there would be no makeup, so you and the backer would
each get $5,000.
   Depending on your skill level, you may be able to negotiate a better deal, perhaps 55/45 or
even 60/40 in your favor. Some backers offer backing for live tournaments that are 40/60, but the
backer covers all traveling expenses.
   Finally, if you play live tournaments, you can keep a smaller bankroll because you will have a
higher ROI and there are usually fewer players in live tournaments compared to online. This will
result in you having smaller swings. Just be sure to account for travel expenses. If you are not
diligent, they can quickly pile up, making even large winners into losers.



Game Selection
The topic of game selection has already been discussed when analysing win rates for cash game
players. Similar to cash games, in tournaments you need to consider your edge in each event you
could play. Of course, if you are the best player in the world and have an infinite bankroll you
simply want to play the highest stake games you can find. However, for us mere humans, quite
often playing smaller games where our ROI and variance will be lower is a better idea than
playing bigger games with higher variance and lower ROI.
   A major issue for tournament game selection is that there are only so many tournaments
available with a specific buy-in, so you have to choose a range of buy-ins. You then average
your buy-ins to determine your average buy-in (ABI) and consider it for bankroll management.
   For example, if you play three tournaments with buy-ins of $100, $200 and $500, then your
ABI is $267. Playing a very wide spread of buy-ins presents an additional problem. As the
spread becomes wider, you will experience more variance.
   Table 32 shows the effects that having a wide spread in buy-ins can produce in a player’s
results. In simulation #1, the player plays a schedule of 1,800 $109 MTTs, 149 $1,050 buy-in
MTTs, 49 $2,100 MTTs, one $5,200 MTT, and one $10,300 MTT for a total of 2,000 games. In
simulation #2 the player also plays a total of 2,000 games, but instead all buy-ins are exactly
$235.
                  Table 32: Variation of Results with a Wide Spread in Buy-ins

   In both situations the player invests approximately the same amount of money and has the
same EV, but the probability of loss is 10x larger in Situation #1 when they play the schedule
with a wide spread in buy-ins and can experience swings from -$262,000 to $1.4 million, while
their worst possible run in situation #2 is only -$36,000. I learned this the hard way in 2016 when
I had my worst downswing ever. I won approximately $60,000 over the course of 2,000 mid-
stakes online MTTs, but lost $120,000 playing fewer than 200 high stakes MTTs, including the
$10,000 SCOOP High ME and the $5,000 WCOOP ME when my ABI was $103. Losing just
those two tournaments cost me 150 buy-ins! (Ouch!)
   Table 33 displays actual results for real online players and their respective stats so you can see
the correlation between the results and the different metrics. The data is taken from
sharkscope.com.




                   Table 33: MTT Results of Some of the World’s Best Players

   Ability is a rating developed by SharkScope. It goes up to 100 and shows a player’s ability
based on an assessment of all the other statistics. Early Finishes refers to the frequency a player
has finished in the bottom 10% of tournaments, and Late Finishes refers to the frequency a
player has finished in the top 10%.
   Player 1 is arguably the best online MTT player in the world. After 21,000 MTTs played, he
crushed the highest stakes with a 50% Avg ROI, for an astonishing net profit of $2.6 Million!
   Players 2, 3, 4 and 5 crush the high stakes and are also among the best players in the world.
                Table 34: MTT Results of Great Players in the Mid-high Stakes

  Players 6-10 are great players who play the mid-high stakes (Table 34). This type of player
has the potential to become one of the best players in the world. Some of them are still working
towards that goal while others are content with just printing money at the mid-stakes.




                   Table 35: MTT Results of Low- and Mid-stakes Regulars

   Players 11-15 are low and mid stakes regulars (Table 35). In this group we start to see lower
Avg ROIs and also a wider spread in their results, with some of them winning small amounts or
even losing. These type of players should spend more time working on their game, making sure
they have all the fundamentals well covered. They should actively be looking for a poker
mentor/coach, or join a group of players who study together and support each other.
   Players 11 and 14 are clearly playing too high for their current skill level.
                            Table 36: MTT Results of Losing Players

   Players 16-20 are losing players (Table 36). All of them are playing stakes too high for their
current skill level. They should stop playing the higher buy-in games, put a lot of work in on
their technical abilities, read theory books, watch as many instructional videos as they can and
definitely get professional coaching to help them fix their biggest leaks. In general, they seem to
be busting the tournaments a little too often in the early stages and not getting to the late stages
as often as they should.



The Mental Game
There are several books written about the mental game, such as Positive Poker and Peak Poker
Performance both by Dr. Patricia Cardner and Jonathan Little, so I won’t be spending a lot of
time in this section of the book.

    However, it is worth mentioning that mental game is absolutely key in poker success and
  particularly in MTTs.

   Mental game has been my biggest leak during most of my poker career and there are some
aspects of it that I still occasionally struggle with. Thanks to my mental game coaches Elliot Roe
and Dr. Tricia Cardner, I was able to overcome most of my mental game limitations, so I
strongly recommend you to read books on mental game, listen to podcasts, watch videos and, if
possible, get coaching if you really want to succeed at poker.
   In my experience, there are several mindset traits that winning players have in common, while
losing players tend to be on the opposite side of the spectrum. They can be summarised as
follows:


Winning Player

  ♦ Generally positive attitude.

  ♦ Understands variance but takes full responsibility for their results.

  ♦ Great work ethic, constantly works on improving their game and puts in the volume.

  ♦ Has emotions under control.

  ♦ Is always looking for feedback and open to criticism.

  ♦ Long-term results oriented.

  ♦ Increases EV by playing weaker opposition most of the time.

  ♦ Plays only as many tables as possible while remaining mindful and playing their A+
    game.

  ♦ Takes care of their health by eating healthy foods, working out, meditating and drinking a
    lot of water.

  ♦ Sleeps well, particularly the nights before big events.

  ♦ Pre- and post-game routines.

  ♦ Is part of a network of likeminded successful poker players and constantly discusses poker
     hands and strategy with them.


Losing Player

  ♦ Generally negative attitude.

  ♦ Blames variance, bad luck, the poker room or even the dealers for their bad results.

  ♦ Is lazy, never works on their game and struggles to put in the hours at the tables.
  ♦ Is often on tilt.

  ♦ Doesn’t take criticism.

  ♦ Short-term results oriented.

  ♦ Has a huge ego, therefore plays against better opponents all the time.

  ♦ Plays too many tables and autopilots, generally playing their B or C game.

  ♦ Doesn’t take care of their health, eats junk food and never works out.

  ♦ Drugs/alcohol abuse.

  ♦ Doesn’t have good sleeping habits, has no problem with going out and partying the night
    before a big event.

  ♦ Jumps directly from bed to the poker tables.

  ♦ Tells bad beat stories and complains about how unlucky they are to poker friends.



Tournament Life
I mentioned earlier how MTTs are fundamentally different to cash games and also how top MTT
players have a good grasp on how to adjust to the different stages of a tournament. This is
because they understand the concept of tournament life.


Winning a Poker Tournament
Winning a tournament can be seen in two different ways. We all know that the winner of a
tournament is the player who wins all the chips, but another way to see it is that the winner of a
tournament is the last player standing.
  Tournaments are about survival, outlasting your opponents rather than trying to bust them
yourself. So, tournament life refers to the value of still having chips in a poker tournament.
  If tournaments are not driven solely by Chip EV (cEV), what other factors should impact your
decisions at the table?

The EV of Future Hands
This concept is easier to understand with an example.


Example
You are playing the WSOP ME and on the first hand of the first level with 50,000 chips at
75/150 (333bb deep) it is folded to the SB, a crazy guy, who goes all-in without looking at his
cards. You are in the BB and look down to J8o. Would you call?
  J8o is ahead of a random hand, having 51.48% equity. Calling makes 10.9bb per hand, so is
worth 1,090bb/100. Analyzing the spot from a cEV perspective, it should be an easy call because
folding is 0bb EV. However, it should be obvious to most people that you cannot call off with
J8o in this spot even if it is a +cEV play, but why is that?
   If you wait for a premium hand such as AA next time the crazy dude shoves, you will make
+235bb per hand or 23,500bb/100. So, there is a lot of value in waiting for better spots. While
this is clearly an extreme example and you have to figure out how often a better spot will come
up, it serves the purpose of illustrating the EV of future hands.


The EV of Gaining a Higher Payout
This concept is straightforward. Avoiding losing all your chips in a tournament has the potential
to gain you a higher payout because other players may get eliminated before you. So, there is
value in folding and staying alive, hoping for other players to bust. This is quite different from
cash games where the EV of folding is always 0.
   The main issue with these factors is that they are not easy to quantify. This is why
mathematical models (algorithms) such as the Independent Chip Model (ICM) and Future Game
Simulation (FGS) were developed.


The Independent Chip Model (ICM)
In a cash game if you double your starting stack, you double your money, but in a tournament,
the number of chips and their monetary value are not directly correlated. Let’s see an example.


Example
You are playing a 10-person $10 buy-in SNG with a total prize pool of $100. Only the top three
players will be paid, with first getting $50, second $30 and third $20. For simplicity, there is no
rake.
  At the beginning of the SNG, each player is given 1,000 chips and they are worth $10. If you
bust before getting into the money, you lose $10, and if you win the tournament, you end up with
10,000 chips. The total prize pool was $100 yet you only get paid $50. So, you ended with 100%
of the chips but are paid only 50% of the prize pool.
   Multiplying your stack does not multiply its value, so even if you double up on the first hand
of an SNG and end up with a stack of 2,000 chips, the value of your stack does not double. The
chips you won are worth less than the chips you risked.

    This is known as the Principle of Diminishing Chip Value: In poker tournaments, the
  chips risked are worth more than the chips won, and the more chips you have, the less each
  chip is worth.

   ICM is a mathematical model designed to assign a monetary value to chip stacks that is
representative of their equity share of the remaining prize pool.
   Based on the stack sizes, ICM calculates the probability of each player finishing in a particular
place and multiplies those probabilities by the payouts for each position. These calculations are
generally too complicated to perform by hand, but fortunately there are many online ICM
calculators such as holdemresources.net/icmcalculator that can be used for free.
   Returning to our 10-person SNG example, imagine there are four players remaining with the
following stack distributions (Table 37).




                             Table 37: Example of an ICM Outcome

   Player A has 60% of the chips, but their stack value isn’t $60 as the most they can possibly
win is $50 by finishing first. Since they will not finish first 100% of the time, their stack value
has to be less than $50. ICM assigns a value of $40.39 to his stack.
   Player D is the short stack and has 10% of the chips in play, but this stack is worth a lot more
than $10.
   ICM is widely used for final table deal making, although it tends to overvalue short stacks.
Another model used for deal making is Chip Chop, but Chip Chop tends to overvalue big stacks.
Using Chip Chop in our example, Player A, who has 60% of all the chips, would get a payment
of $60, which is more than first place. Clearly that is irrational.
   The discrepancy between chip values and monetary value generates two types of EV for
players’ actions:


  ♦ Chip Expected Value (cEV): The average number of chips you can expect as the result
    of an action.

  ♦ Monetary Expected Value ($EV): The average amount of money you can expect as the
    result of an action, based on your current prize pool equity.

    In cash games, cEV and $EV are the same (ignoring rake); however, in MTTs, the
  player’s decisions should always be based on $EV.

  Let’s see a practical example using Holdem Resources Calculator (HRC) to calculate cEV and
ICM push/fold equilibrium strategies with 50/100 blinds.




                             Table 38: ICM Dictates Tight Pushing

  In Table 38 we can see how the CO, BN and SB are forced to play really tightly because of the
money bubble. Many hands that are profitable cEV shoves are -$EV shoves, so they can no
longer be pushed.




                             Table 39: ICM Dictates Wide Pushing

   In Table 39 the BB and the BN stacks have been switched and now the BN can take advantage
of his big stack and push any two cards as the blinds are forced to call off really tightly due to
ICM.
  The effect of ICM in equilibrium strategies depends on the stack sizes and the tournament
payment structure. Tournaments that are very top-heavy reward more aggressive play and
tournaments with a flatter structure reward tighter play.
  It is also important that you pay close attention to your opponents’ strategies, as you can’t
apply ICM pressure to players who are not ICM aware or players who choose not to follow ICM.
The push/fold calculator assumes all players play ICM equilibrium strategies. If there is a player
who doesn’t follow ICM and you get involved in a hand against them, they can cost you EV, and
that EV will be transferred to the other players at the table.
   For example, in Table 38, the SB ICM strategy is to push 14.9% of hands, but that assumes the
BB is ICM aware and thus calls with only 6.7% of hands. If the BB is calling a regular cEV
range of 23.8% hands, both blinds would lose EV even though you are playing “correctly”.

ICM and Solvers

Before modern solvers existed, ICM calculations were only possible for simple push/fold
situations, but most solvers have now incorporated ICM calculators, opening a new world of
possibilities for the development of final table strategies. With so many different final table
payment structures and possible stack depth distributions, it’s almost impossible to develop full
strategies to cover all possibilities and, anyway, that would go way beyond the scope of this
book. Instead, we are going to be focusing on the study of regular equilibrium strategies, but I do
recommend you run your own ICM calculations and develop a sense for how to deviate from
“standard” play in final table and bubble situations.

ICM Limitations

ICM is based on some specific assumptions that make the calculations possible:


  ♦ Calculations are performed for the current hand in a vacuum, and any future play is
    ignored, such as blinds increasing on future hands, or the future value of building a big
    stack and gaining the ability to push shorter stacks around.

  ♦ ICM assumes all players are of equal skill.

  ♦ Players’ table image is irrelevant.

  ♦ Calculations are limited to a fixed number of players, usually down to the final table only,
    or final two tables, so ICM can’t be applied to the earlier stages where players are still far
     away from the money.

  ♦ ICM does not consider the players’ positions. For example, a 4bb stack on the BN is far
     more valuable than in first position.

  Because of these assumptions, ICM isn’t perfect. However, it still provides excellent $EV
approximations that help players make better decisions during final tables, money bubbles and
SNGs.

ICM General Guidelines

Obviously, it is almost impossible to run ICM calculations during actual play, but analyzing
different ICM setups in your study time can greatly help you develop the right instincts. Next, we
summarize some of the most useful ICM guidelines:


  ♦ Call off tighter in tournaments than in cash games.

  ♦ Avoid marginal +cEV spots.

  ♦ Medium stacks are forced to play tightly in the presence of short stacks, and particularly
    during the money bubble.

  ♦ Big stacks can threaten medium size stacks, particularly during the money bubble as they
    can only stack off with very tight ranges.


Risk Premium
In tournaments, because of the principle of diminishing chip value, we know that the chips you
can win aren’t necessarily worth as much as the chips you already have. You can think about it
as risking more for a pot that is in practice smaller than cEV suggests. Therefore, in tournaments,
you need more equity than in cash games to make a +$EV play. This extra equity is what we call
risk premium (Diagram 17).
                                   Diagram 17: Risk Premium

   Returning to our 10-person SNG example, as we saw in Table 39, the BN who is the chip
leader with 6,000 chips can go all-in with any two cards. I mentioned that according to ICM, the
blinds are forced to call with very tight ranges because of the money bubble. In fact, after the BN
goes all-in with 100% hands the SB, who is the second stack with 1,800 chips, has a calling
range of only AA-TT. If the SB folds, then the BB has a calling range of only AA-88, AKs, and
AQs.
   Let’s calculate the cEV of the BB’s call with AKo against the BN’s all-in, assuming the SB
has already folded, based on the equities in Table 40.
                            Table 40: Equities Versus a 100% Range




  Calling off with AKo is clearly very profitable in terms of chips, so now let’s calculate the
$EV of the BB’s call with AKo in the same spot:




   Using HRC ICM calculator, the current value of BB’s stack after a fold is $18.02. Instead,
after a call and a win, the value of this stack with the new stack distributions would be $27.12, so
the $ value added to BB’s stack is:




  Then:




  So, calling off with AKo is unprofitable in terms of monetary value.
  Using the EV equations, we can calculate the minimum equity required to make this call
profitable:
Now let’s do the same with the $EV equation:
   For the BB to have a + $EV call with their hand, they need to have 66.44% equity, while for
the call to be +cEV, they can call any hand with 47% equity. The difference in equity is the risk
premium:




Risk Premium Correlation Matrix
Risk premium changes depending on the stack sizes of players involved in the hand and is higher
when calling big bets, particularly if calling for all your chips and putting your tournament life at
risk (Table 41).
                          Table 41: Average MTT Risk Premium Values

  Depending on the tournament pay structure and exact stack distribution, risk premium might
vary. The flatter the payment structure, the higher the risk premium and the more top heavy the
payment structure, the less risk premium. In winner-takes-all tournaments, there is a risk
premium of 0 because there is no benefit in moving up the payout ladder. The presence of very
short stacks will increase the other players’ risk premiums (particularly other short stacks).
   For calling small bets such as min-raises, risk premium can be less than 2% but it still makes a
difference in BB defending ranges, particularly for the bottom of a range that is made of hands
that are marginally +cEV calls. Another reason to defend tighter from the BB when you have a
high risk premium against the opener is that risk premium also applies to post-flop bets. It will be
quite difficult for the BB to call bets across multiple streets and so their EQR will be even lower
than in a regular cEV spot. Notice that risk premium is the extra equity required for a play to be
profitable. This means that it does not only apply to calling bets, but also to making them. For
this reason, the BB should defend wider against players who have a high risk premium against
them as they will struggle to barrel off and the BB will be able to realize more equity than in a
regular cEV spot.


Future Game Simulation (FGS)
As mentioned previously, ICM is not perfect and so newer models such as FGS were developed
specifically to target some of ICM limitations such as:


  ♦ The players’ positions relative to the blinds.

  ♦ The size of the blinds and antes relative to the stacks.

  ♦ The fact that the blinds move around the table.

  FGS runs ICM simulations involving a number of hands subsequent to the current one,
calculating the probability of each possible outcome and the ICM EV of each player’s stack for
each outcome.
  Some situations where players can benefit from using FGS over ICM are when:


  ♦ The blinds are about to increase.

  ♦ Players are very short stacked and afraid of losing playability or fold equity.

  ♦ There is a high chance of a short stack busting soon or blinding out (this is particularly
     useful during money bubbles or when playing satellites).

  While FGS is an improvement on ICM and generates a closer approximation to real $EV by
looking into the future, the model still has its own limitations:


  ♦ FGS calculations are a lot more resource-intensive than regular ICM, and therefore they
    take a lot more time to be computed.

  ♦ FGS ignores post-flop play and can only be used for push/fold calculations for a limited
    number of players, and is therefore useless for the early stages of an MTT.

  ♦ FGS based results are significantly different from ICM only in situations where the table
    is relatively short-handed (six players or fewer), and stacks are shorter than 10bb, with
    some extremely shallow stacks (5bb or fewer).

  The most affected positions will be UTG, SB and BB.

    The most important concept that can be derived from these models is the principle of
  diminishing chip value: In poker tournaments, the chips risked are worth more than the
  chips won, and the more chips you have, the less each chip is worth.

   Until now the mathematical models we have used to assign a monetary value to chip stacks,
ICM and FGS, are both limited to situations where players are already in the money, or very
close to it, but what happens in the earlier stages of a tournament? Is the principle of diminishing
chip value still applicable? Should players be risk prone or risk adverse? What about other
factors that aren’t covered by the models, such as skill edge?


The Gambler’s Ruin Problem
Consider a situation where two players begin with fixed stakes, transferring points until one or
the other is “ruined” by reaching zero points.
   Gamblers who are playing a fair game (with 50% probability of winning) will eventually
either go broke or double their wealth. These events are equally likely or the game would not be
fair.

Fair Coin Flipping

Consider a coin-flipping game with two players where each player has a 50% chance of winning
each flip of the coin. After each flip of the coin the loser transfers one chip to the winner. The
game ends when one player has all the chips.
  If Player1 has n1 chips and Player2 n2 chips, the probabilities that Player1 (P1) and Player2
(P2) will lose all their chips are:




   Consider when both players have the same number of chips. Let’s suppose both players have
six chips. The likelihood of each player losing is:




  Now let’s suppose one player has more chips than the other. Let’s give P1 8 chips and P2 only
5 chips. Then the probability of each losing is:
  We conclude (unsurprisingly) that even with equal odds of winning, the player who starts with
fewer chips is more likely to lose.

Unfair Coin Flipping

In the event of an unfair coin, where P1 wins each toss with probability p, and P2 wins with
probability q = 1-p, then the probability of each player going broke is:
  Let’s focus our attention in P2’s probability of losing, which is exactly the same as the
probability of P1 winning:
  Consider a gambling game where there are 20 total chips in play. Hero is P1, what is Hero’s
probability of winning with different stack sizes when:


  ♦ The game is fair (both players are equally likely to win)

  ♦ Hero has a skill edge (52% probability of winning each individual gamble)

  ♦ Hero has a skill deficit (48% probability of winning each individual gamble)
                     Table 42: Probabilities of Winning Coin Flipping Game

   With identical skill levels, Hero’s probability of winning increases linearly with their chip
stack. If Hero has 2 chips, the probability of winning is 10%, if they double their stack to 4 chips,
the probability of winning doubles to 20%. If they have 10 chips (half the chips in play) the
probability of winning is 50%.
   When Hero has a skill edge, their probability of winning no longer increases linearly with the
chip stack. If Hero has 2 chips the probability of winning is 19% and if they double their stack to
4 chips, the probability of winning increases to 34% (it does not double). If they have 10 chips
(half the chips in play) their probability of winning is 69%. This is because the value function
isn’t a straight line but instead has a concave shape. So, the more chips Hero has, the less steep
the line becomes, and the lower the marginal value of each new chip added to the stack
(Diagrams 18 and 19).




                                Diagram 18: Fair Game (p=0.5)
                                Diagram 19: Skill Edge (p=0.52)

   As Hero’s stack size increases, the slope at the point of the curve decreases. For example, the
curve is steeper at 2 than at 18. The line’s slope is the marginal value of each chip Hero adds to
their stack. With identical skill edge, the marginal value of each chip added is 0.05, but in the
case of skill edge or skill deficit, the value function isn’t a straight line and thus the marginal
value of chips added will vary depending on the total chips Hero already has. The last chip added
to Hero’s stack when they have the skill edge is the least valuable (0.021). The last chip added to
Hero’s stack when they have the skill deficit is the most valuable one (0.096).
                                Diagram 20: Skill Deficit (p=0.48)

   When Hero has a skill deficit (Diagram 20), their probability of winning also does not
increase in a linear fashion with the chip stack. If Hero has 2 chips their probability of winning is
4%, if they double their stack to 4 chips, the probability of winning is 10% (more than double). If
they have 10 chips (half the chips in play) their probability of winning is only 31%.
   For example, imagine Hero is offered a coin flip to play for 5 chips when stacks are 10 chips.
The EV they get from that gamble can be calculated by drawing a straight line from 5 to 15 and
taking the value that is half of it. If Hero has a skill edge, that value will always be below the
curve, meaning that any even gamble in cEV will be -EV in probability of winning. If they have
a skill deficit the value will always be above the curve and any 0 cEV gamble will be +EV in
terms of probability of winning.
Diagram 21: Skill Edge (p=0.52)
                               Diagram 22: Skill Deficit (p=0.48)

    From the Gambler’s Ruin problem, we can conclude that if Hero has a skill edge, they
  should be more risk averse and avoid marginal gambles. Conversely, if they have a skill
  deficit, they should be more willing to gamble for big chunks of their stack.

  All of this makes sense intuitively. If you have a big skill edge against a bad player, you
shouldn’t be too eager to get all-in with a flip pre-flop for a zillion big blinds when you can
slowly grind them down by playing post-flop and capitalizing on the mistakes they will make.
Gambling it out for a lot of chips in marginal spots and increasing the variance will only benefit
the weaker player and that will give them the best possible shot at winning.
   Another example can be taken from casino games where the house holds the edge. The casino
would much rather you play 100 $20 blackjack hands than a single $2,000 blackjack hand. By
decreasing the variance, you are almost guaranteed to lose.


Conclusion
In tournaments there are many moving parts, including, but not limited to, different table sizes,
field sizes, stack depths, blind structures, payment structures, players’ skill levels, bounties, and
re-buys. The existence of so many variables makes it impossible to analyze everything
accurately. Unfortunately, there is not a single unified model that covers all of these factors
completely, and creating a model that can account for every single variable is almost impossible.
Furthermore, even if such an algorithm existed, not even the most powerful modern super-
computers would be able to calculate the solution and provide perfect strategies.
   This is the reason why there are so many different approaches to tournament poker. No one
has a definite answer to what “optimal” play is, particularly with the high variance that is
intrinsic to MTTs. Simply copying the “winning formula” from the latest big MTT winners isn’t
enough to become a long-term winning player. It is often the case that the best players in the
world are using strategies so unique to themselves and their metagame that blindly trying to copy
them can be detrimental and produce negative results.
   In poker tournaments, the chips monetary value is not fixed, so the equilibrium isn’t static. It
is actually dynamic. The equilibrium is constantly moving and the best MTT players in the world
are the ones who really understand this concept and are capable of shifting gears, knowing when
to pass on small edges and when push them. This skill is particularly difficult to master, and
while a few players are naturally talented and gifted, most of us have honed this ability after
years of play and study, trial and error, and victories and losses.
   I dare say that this is probably the single most important skill for any MTT player to possess.
All the models described in this chapter are aimed to improve your understanding of the
difference between tournaments and cash games, about the differences between cEV and $EV,
and the importance of tournament life. The goal is to use the equilibrium strategies presented in
the upcoming text as a starting point and be capable of developing your own judgment to decide
when to follow them and when to deviate in order to maximize profit.




07




MTT EQUILIBRIUM STRATEGIES:
PLAYING FIRST IN
The equilibrium strategies presented in this chapter were generated with modern solvers and
super-computers, based on cEV for 9-max tables with a 12.5% ante. This is a typical tournament
environment, but it is up to you to adapt them to your respective games.
   In tournaments, players have to navigate many different stack sizes but, unfortunately, there is
a limit to the content that can be included in a single book, so we will focus our study on some
the most important stack depths where most of the tournament action happens (these being 15bb,
25bb, 40bb and 60bb).
   For deep-stacked no-ante situations (typically the first few levels of a tournament) there is less
dead money in the pot, so ranges are generally tighter and the equilibrium strategies are very
similar to those of cash games except there is no rake. This results in speculative hands
increasing in value. Calling bets and playing post-flop becomes more attractive.

Playing First In

As mentioned previously, with stack depths shorter than 10bb, it is correct to play a push/fold
game because the EV loss with short stacks is negligible compared to a more complex strategy.
   It is vitally important that you think ahead before making your pre-flop decision. Take note of
your own stack depth as well as the players remaining to act and their stack depths. Assess the
likelihood of them re-raising or calling.
   You should know before you raise if your hand is a raise-fold or a raise-call. It could be the
case that your hand can call an all-in against the range from one position but not from another, or
that you can call a 15bb all-in but not a 20bb all-in. You also need to know if your hand works
better as an open shove or a min-raise so you don’t find yourself in a difficult spot if you min-
raise, an opponent shoves and then you don’t know what to do.

    This might seem like way too many variables to consider, especially for inexperienced
  players, but it is important to be always mindful and aware of your situation and to avoid
  autopiloting.

   There are many online players who play great poker when playing only one table but make
frequent blunders when multi-tabling due to silly mistakes that could have easily been avoided
by paying closer attention.



Bet-sizing
After extensive testing with solvers, my general assessment is that RFI bet-size does not have a
significant impact on your bottom line as long as you are using somewhat reasonable bet-sizes
and play reasonable ranges for that bet-size. The bigger the bet-size, the fewer hands you can
play profitably. If you decide to open to 3bb, you are forced to play a tighter range than if you
decide to open for a min-raise, otherwise you will lose money with the bottom of your range.
   The sweet spot for RFI bet-size seems to be somewhere between 2bb and 2.5bb from BN to
UTG, and 2.5bb to 3.5bb in blind vs blind battles.
   I recommend min-raising when stack depths are in the rejam region (less than 25bb) for two
main reasons:


  ♦ Raise-folding from a short stack is quite expensive and you don’t want to overcommit
    yourself. For example, if you raise to 3x from UTG with 10bb and the BB goes all-in,
    you will need to call 7bb to play for a 14.6bb pot. Getting better than 2-to-1 pot odds, you
    will be committed to call off with any two cards in your reasonable raising range. If you
    instead min-raised, you would have to call 8bb into a 13.6bb pot, getting 1.7-to-1 pot
    odds, which allows you to fold the worst hands in your range.

  ♦ One of the main weapons players have when facing open raises with shallow stacks is to
    rejam all-in and, against bigger raise sizings, the Villains will get a better price on their
    rejams. For example, if you are in the CO and open to 2.5x with a 20bb effective stack,
    the BB has to risk 19bb to win 5.125bb. This bet needs to work




  of the time. If instead you open to 2x, this bet needs to work




  Your 3-bet and squeeze sizings will vary according to the player’s position and stack depth as
shown in Tables 43 and 44.
                          Table 43: MTT Recommended 3-bet Sizings




                         Table 44: MTT Recommended Squeeze Sizings

   At stack depths 30-35bb and greater, the threat of getting rejammed is lower because of the
higher risk/reward ratio. This means you can increase your raise size to 2.3x and not worry too
much about giving the Villains a better price on their rejams. By increasing your raise size, you
cut down the Villain’s implied odds, making it tougher for them to peel with the weaker hands in
their range. With 100bb+, the RFI size can be 2.3-2.5x; I’ve seen some regs going bigger than
that, but I haven’t found substantial evidence that going any bigger yields a higher EV.
   In general, you want to have bigger bet-sizes when deep stacked and when out of position. I
like using a smaller 3-bet size from the SB than from the BB, because the SB has to worry about
the BB waking up with a hand, so the smaller sizing saves a few chips when this happens. Also,
the SB 3-betting range is in general less polarized than the BB, so it doesn’t mind getting called
as much as the BB does.
   If the 3-bet size requires you to invest over 1/3 of your stack, you will be pot-committed
unless your hand is absolute trash, so I wouldn’t recommend investing over 1/3 of your stack
with a terrible hand. In that case, you are better off going all-in instead, reducing your
opponent’s strategic options to calling the all-in or folding.
   With fewer than 40bb, all 4-bets are only all-in because if you choose non-all-in 4-bet-sizes
you would either be pot-committed or would have to use an extremely small size, which will
give the Villains too good of a price to take the flop and realize equity. With 50bb to 100bb, you
start to see non-all-in 4-bets to 2.25-2.5x when IP and 2.5-3x when OOP. All 5-bets are always
all-in.
   In modern online MTTs, some players still use smaller bet-sizes than recommended. This is
mostly because people still fold too often to small bet-sizes. However, as the games evolve,
bigger bets will become the norm because players now understand that calling small raises and
realizing equity is always an option. This is the reason why the old silly click-back 5-bets and 6-
bets are now pretty much extinct.
   As explained in the General Guidelines for Pre-flop Bet-sizing section in Chapter 4, the earlier
the position the smaller your bet-size should be, so use a slightly smaller bet RFI and 3-bet sizes
from EP. Increasing your bet-size as you move closer to the BN is a valid strategy that I use in
my games, but it comes at a cost of increasing the complexity of your strategies and I haven’t
found solid evidence of this having a really large impact on your bottom line. So, using a
simpler, easier to execute strategy with fewer bet-sizes is recommended.



Short Stack Push/Fold Charts
The following charts (Hand Ranges 88-95) were generated with HRC using FGS. The numbers
in the cells represent the maximum number of big blinds that can be pushed with that hand for
each position. Hands in black can be pushed when having 10bb or less. For example, the SB can
only push 95o with 5bb or less, but can push 95s with 10bb or less.
    Hand Range 88:
Stack Depths for SB Push
    Hand Range 89:
Stack Depths for BN Push
     Hand Range 90:
Stack Depths for CO Push
    Hand Range 91:
Stack Depths for HJ Push
    Hand Range 92:
Stack Depths for LJ Push
       Hand Range 93:
Stack Depths for UTG+2 Push
       Hand Range 94:
Stack Depths for UTG+1 Push
                                     Hand Range 95:
                                Stack Depths for UTG Push

  We now move on to examine the best way to react when the action is folded to you. We will
consider all positions from the small blind round to UTG and all different stack depths from
10bb to 80bb.



Small Blind PFI Strategy
The SB is the position where you get to VPIP the largest number of hands when it folds to you
(83% on average). This is due to the fact that the SB has a discount to enter the pot and has to
worry about only one player left to act. Table 45 is a summary of SB GTO Action Frequencies
by stack depth:




                     Table 45: SB GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth


Small Blind Strategy at 15bb
With 10-15bb stacks, play a push/limp/fold strategy and as stacks get deeper, you should push
fewer hands, resulting in limping becoming the dominant strategy.
   At 15bb, the solver likes to push hands that have good blockers such as Ax, Kx, and hands that
have a lot of equity against calling ranges but bad post-flop EqR, such as small pocket pairs (66-
22), and hands that have a ton of equity but would struggle to call a jam themselves such as
suited connectors (98s-65s). The limping range consists of high equity hands that can call an all-
in, such as pocket pairs (77+), broadways, suited Ax and Kx and hands such as Q2o, J8o, T4s
and 73s that have fine equity in limped pots but don’t mind limp-folding against a jam (Hand
Ranges 96-98).
   At 17bb, the SB starts to have a non-all-in raise size, and the raise size gets bigger as stacks
get deeper, from 2.5x at 17bb to 3.5x at 30bb. At deeper stacks, the solver likes to use even
bigger raise sizes (up to 5x) but there is no substantial EV loss by using 3.5x, and so I believe
that using sizes bigger than 3.5x is overkill.




                                 Hand Range 96: SB vs BB (15bb)
                          • All-in 23.7% / • Limp 61.5% / • Fold 14.8%
Hand Range 97: SB vs BB 15bb (Limp vs All-in)
        • Call 21.3% / • Fold 78.7%
             Hand Range 98:
     SB vs BB 15bb (Limp vs 3x Raise)
• All-in 12.9% / • Call 49.1% / • Fold 38%
                              Hand Range 99: SB vs BB (25bb)
                              • All-in 1.8% / • Raise 3.3x 30% /
                                • Limp 50.3% / • Fold 17.9%


Small Blind Strategy at 25bb
At 25bb, the SB open pushing range starts to disappear. The only hands that want to open push
are baby pairs (44-22) and some offsuit mid Ax (A9o, A8o). The strategy becomes
raise/limp/fold (Hand Range 99).
   The limping range is made of some traps with the strongest Ax (AKo-A9o), mid pocket pairs
(99-44) and many hands with good equity that don’t want to raise and be forced to fold against a
jam, such as KTo, Q9s and 76s. The raising range is again polarized and is made up of the
strongest hands that can call a jam, such as pocket pairs (66+), offsuit Ax (A8o+), suited Ax
(A5s+) and the strongest broadways. The rest of the raising range is focused on having a blocker,
such as A7o-A2o, Kxo and hands with decent playability in single raised pots, such as KJo, QTo,
J8s, and 74s. (Hand Ranges 100-102).




                                        Hand Range 100:
                                 SB vs BB 25bb (Limp vs All-in)
                               • Call All-in 15.2% / • Fold 84.8%
            Hand Range 101:
   SB vs BB 25bb (Limp vs 3.3x Raise)
• All-in 11% / • Call 43.7% / • Fold 45.4%
          Hand Range 102:
SB vs BB 25bb (3.3x Open vs All-in)
 • Call All-in 30.1% / • Fold 69.9%
                              Hand Range 103: SB vs BB (40bb)
                             • Raise 3.5x 26.4% / • Limp 54.4% /
                                        • Fold 19.2%


Small Blind Strategy at 40bb
At 40bb, there is no all-in range and most hands are played as a mixed strategy, with the
strongest hands being raised more often than limped and the weaker hands being limped more
often than raised (Hand Range 103).
   After limping and facing a 3.5x raise, the SB will defend by going all-in with 5.9% of their
range, including pocket pairs (99, 88, 77, 33, 22), strong Axo (AQo, AJo) and a small frequency
of weak Axo (ATo, A5o, A4o).
   The SB also has a non-all-in re-raise to 2.75x that includes the strongest hands that are happy
to stack off pre-flop, such as 55+, AT+, and KQs, and some bluffs with good blockers such as
Axo and Kxo (Hand Ranges 104-105).




                                         Hand Range 104:
                                  SB vs BB 40bb (Limp vs 3.5x)
                               • All-in 5.9% / • Raise 2.75x 6.4% /
                                    • Call 42% / • Fold 45.6%
                                       Hand Range 105:
                           SB vs BB 40bb (3.5x Open vs 2.75x 3-bet)
                                • All-in 13.1% / • Call 40.4% /
                                          • Fold 46.5%


Small Blind Strategy at 60bb
The common trend seen as stacks get deeper is the increase in the limping frequency and a
reduction in the raising frequency. There aren’t any hands that play a pure raising strategy, but
there are many that play a pure limping strategy.
   At 60bb, after limping and facing a raise, stacks are too deep to limp/shove, and so the only re-
raising size is to 3.4x. The limp/reraising range is made of the best hands that are happy to stack
off pre-flop and hands with good blockers and some board coverage (Hand Ranges 106-107).




                                Hand Range 106: SB vs BB (60bb)
                         • Raise 3.5x 15.1% / • Limp 69.9% / • Fold 15%

   If you raise and face a 3-bet, you are still a bit too deep to simply jam 60bb. The only hands
that want to do that are AKo and A5s with a small frequency, so you are safe to simply ignore
this branch of the tree and use only a 2.6x 4-bet-sizing. The hands that should be 4-bet are KK,
QQ, AK, and AQo, plus some bluffs made with blocker hands. Notice that the solver likes to
slowplay AA, calls with a lot of suited hands and folds most offsuit and disconnected hands to
the 3-bet (Hand Range 108).




                                      Hand Range 107:
                                SB vs BB 60bb (Limp vs 3.5x)
                              • Raise 3.4x 11.7% / • Call 47% /
                                        • Fold 41.3%
                                        Hand Range 108:
                            SB vs BB 60bb (3.5x Open vs 2.75x 3-bet)
                                • All-in 2% / • Raise 2.6x 8.4% /
                                   • Call 44.5% / • Fold 45.1%



Button PFI Strategy
The BN has a very special characteristic that gives them incredible power: no other player can
subsequently enter the pot and force them to play out of position. For this reason, the solver likes
developing a limping range with stack depths 10-30bb. When limping is allowed, the solver
prefers limping over min-raising at stacks 10-12bb, and will play a push/limp/fold strategy with
no min-raises (Table 46).




           Table 46: BN GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth (limping allowed)
                             Hand Range 109: BN 12bb (Limp)
                              • All-in 27.3% / • Limp 14.80% /
                                        • Fold 57.90%

   With stacks 15-30bb, min-raising becomes an important part of the BN strategy because it
allows for post-flop play from in position.
Hand Range 110: BN 20bb (Limp)
 • All-in 8% / • Raise 2x 25.4% /
   • Limp 12.9% / • Fold 53.7%
                               Hand Range 111: BN 30bb (Limp)
                                 • All-in 0% / • Raise 2x 43% /
                                  • Limp 8.2% / • Fold 48.8%

   With 30bb stacks, BN no longer open shoves, as the stacks are now too deep. Starting with
40bb stacks, the solver stops limping altogether and favors a simpler raise/fold strategy. At this
stack depth rejamming all-in against opens involves a bigger risk, and this favors open raises
over limping as the BN can defend very well against 3-bets by calling in position and realizing a
lot of equity that would be denied when forced to fold to an all-in.
   The general principles for limping are similar to those of the SB, including traps and some
weak suited hands that can benefit from seeing flops cheaply, as well as some offsuit high-mid
hands that can flop good top pairs and straight draws.
   The overall BN limping frequency is 11.7% and, although limping allows them to play slightly
wider ranges than playing raise/fold only, there are many reasons why in modern games players
rarely limp from the BN:


  ♦ Limping adds complexity to the BN strategy which makes the implementation of limps
    with well-balanced ranges a difficult task.

  ♦ Variance is increased as the players will be playing post-flop more often and there will be
    more three-way pots as limping gives a great price to the SB to come along.

  ♦ The overall EV gained by incorporating BN limps isn’t as substantial as in the case of the
    SB because the BN doesn’t have a discount on the call and post-flop play is not
    guaranteed to be heads-up.

  ♦ Players still over-fold their BB to BN steals, which makes BN min-raises a lot more
    enticing than limping.


The BN Non-limping Strategy
         Table 47: BN GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth (Limping not Allowed)

   In Table 47 we can see that the deeper the stack depth, the more hands the BN gets to play,
starting with 38.9% total VPIP with 10bb up to 55.5% with 80bb, for a total increase of 16.6% in
raising frequency. One of the main reasons for this massive increase is that deeper stacks favor
the BN’s positional advantage. The best tool the blinds can use to decrease their positional
disadvantage is to rejam all-in, which doesn’t offer a great risk/reward ratio with stacks deeper
than 40bb, so it becomes increasingly difficult for the blinds to deny equity to the BN.
   Due to being guaranteed to be in position throughout the hand, the BN post-flop equity
realization is the highest and it only increases further as stacks get deeper. By going all-in, the
BN forsakes positional advantage and thus there is a massive reduction in the BN open pushing
frequency as stacks get deeper, dropping to 3.5% at 20bb and 0% at 25bb.

BN RFI Range at 15bb

With 15bb, the BN splits their range almost 50/50 between going all-in and min-raising (Hand
Range 112). There is still the same pattern as before with hands that have good equity against
calling ranges but don’t have great post-flop playability being pushed (66-22, AJo-A2o, offsuit
broadways and premium suited connectors).
    Hand Range 112: BN 15bb
• All-in 20.8% / • Raise 2x 18.5% /
            • Fold 60.7%
                                  Hand Range 113: BN 25bb
                               • Raise 2x 46.3% / • Fold 53.7%

BN RFI Range at 25bb

With 25bb, there is no all-in range from the BN (Hand Range 113). At this stack depth having
high card value and high raw equity is more important than having playability. For this reason,
hands such as K7o that have a king blocker to the blinds’ rejamming ranges is more valuable
than having a hand with more playability such as 74s.
   It might be surprising to see the BN folding pocket pairs such as 33 and 22, but these hands
don’t do well as min-raises. They have two reverse blockers (meaning they do not block playable
hands) to the blinds’ rejamming ranges, so you will get re-shoved slightly more often than
normal and will be forced to fold them pre-flop. If someone calls, small pairs also do not fare
well. Most of the time they will be playing as an underpair and either be forced to play passively
and be denied equity, or bluff and get into complicated situations where they invest way too
many chips with a hand that won’t have many outs to improve. To make matters worse, implied
odds are not so great at this stack depth. So, these hands should simply be folded.

BN RFI Range at 40bb

With 40bb, the BN gets to play a wider range than with 25bb, and hands with good post-flop
playability, such as suited gappers, and hands with high implied odds, such as small pocket pairs,
increase in value. The 4-bet frequency is lower than at 25bb because now the SPR will be higher
and allow for more post-flop play, which benefits the BN’s post-flop equity realization (Hand
Range 114).
   Hand Range 114: BN 40bb
• Raise 2.3x 50.9% / • Fold 49.1%
                                   Hand Range 115: BN 60bb
                                • Raise 2.3x 54.4% / • Fold 45.5%

BN RFI Range at 60bb

With 60bb, the BN gets to widen their opening range even more (Hand Range 115). The BN 4-
bet all-in frequency decreases because now the BN is deep enough to have a non-all-in 4-bet
range. Additionally, the BN’s positional advantage increases, so at this stack depth, BN’s main
defense against 3-bets is to flat-call in position at a high frequency (we will look at Defense vs 3-
bet Strategies later in the book).
Cutoff PFI Strategy
There are many drawbacks to implementing limping strategies when outside the blinds and the
BN because there are more players left to act who can over-limp or even raise. Any potential EV
gained by implementing a limping strategy will hardly be enough to compensate for
overcomplicating the overall strategy.
  Furthermore, there are some limitations to what modern computers can do and adding limps
for all players in a 9-max simulation exponentially increases the size of the game tree, which
requires heavy use of abstractions and in turn produces inconsistent results.
   For all these reasons, I decided not to include limping strategies from the cutoff onwards and
will focus on analyzing the raise/fold strategy (which also is congruent with the play in modern
games).
   As we see in Table 48, the total CO VPIP increases as stacks get deeper (similarly to the BN),
from 31.4% at 10bb to 37.50% at 80bb for an average of 33.69% across all positions. At 10bb
and below, the CO plays a push/fold strategy and starts to incorporate min-raises at 12bb. The
overall all-in frequency decreases as stacks get deeper, and sinks to 0% at 20bb.




                     Table 48: CO GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

  With 15bb, the CO all-in range contains high equity hands that are too good to raise-fold but
not good enough to raise-call, such as KTo, QJo and T9s, small and medium pocket pairs, small
Axs and mid-high Axo. The min-raising range consists of the other hands that are happy to raise-
call off, such as good Ax, mid-high pocket pairs, suited broadways and hands with blockers that
can make good top pairs that can easily be raise-folded when facing a rejam (Hand Range 116).




                                  Hand Range 116: CO 15bb
                              • All-in 13.6% / • Raise 2x 16.5% /
                                          • Fold 69.8%
                                   Hand Range 117: CO 25bb
                                • Raise 2x 34.3% / • Fold 65.7%

   With 25bb, there is no all-in range (Hand Range 117). Again, this stack depth is a bit too
awkward to play 33 and 22 because you are too deep to open jam and too shallow to have the
correct implied odds. Therefore folding is the best play when first in from all positions (except
the SB).
   With 40bb, the CO can open a slightly wider range than at 25bb, starting to incorporate some
hands that play well post-flop at deeper stacks such as 33 and 22, plus a few extra suited hands
such as K2s, Q4s, T6s and 96s (Hand Range 118). At 60bb the CO plays a very similar range
(Hand Range 119).




                       Hand Range 118: CO 40bb
                    • Raise 2.3x 36.4% / • Fold 63.6%
                                  Hand Range 119: CO 60bb
                               • Raise 2.3x 37.1% / • Fold 62.3%



Hijack PFI Strategy
From middle position, ranges must become tighter compared to late position due to there being
more players left to act and Hero being forced to play OOP more often.
  At deeper stack depths, the positional disadvantage MP and EP have becomes more relevant
and the threat of having to play OOP hinders their ability to realize equity post-flop effectively
enough to expand their ranges as stacks get deeper. For this reason, from MP and EP, there is no
direct correlation between stack depth and VPIP, and instead we see the VPIP frequency peak at
25-30bb and then either stagnate or decrease.
   As we see in Table 49, the overall HJ VPIP frequency is 26.89%. At 10bb and below, you
should only play push/fold. At 12bb, develop a minraising range, which becomes dominant at
15bb (Hand Range 120). At 17bb, the all-in option starts to disappear, with raise/fold becoming
the only viable strategy at 20bb and deeper.
  With 25bb, there is no all-in range (Hand Range 121). The minraising range focuses on high
card value with hands that can make strong top pairs or good flush draws.




                   Table 49: Hijack GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

  With 40bb, a few more hands are added that play better with slightly deeper stacks such as 33,
96s and 54s, but the overall HJ range shape doesn’t change too much from 25bb to 40bb (Hand
Range 122).
  With 60bb, the HJ opens at roughly the same frequency as with 40bb, but there is a small
change in the range shape, dropping some of the weaker high-low type hands such as K3s, A7o,
and Q6s, and adding more hands that have the possibility of flopping premium hands such as 22
and small suited connectors (Hand Range 123).
   Hand Range 120: HJ 15bb
• All-in 7.7% / • Raise 2x 16.1% /
           • Fold 76.2%
   Hand Range 121: HJ 25bb
• Raise 2x 27.8% / • Fold 72.2%
   Hand Range 122: HJ 40bb
• Raise 2.3x 28.6% / • Fold 71.4%
                                    Hand Range 123: HJ 60bb
                                 • Raise 2.3x 28% / • Fold 71.7%



Lojack PFI Strategy
The LJ play is similar to the HJ, but the overall range shrinks to 22.54% due to the slight
positional disadvantage. Another interesting difference is that at this position there is now raise-
folding range at 10bb stack depths. There are still open shoves at 15bb, but at 17bb, now due to
being too deep to open jam, there are no shoves.
                   Table 50: Lojack GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

  In Table 50 we see that, with 15bb, the LJ likes to have a small open shoving range made of
hands that really benefit from getting all-in pre-flop and realizing their 100% of their equity,
such as 77-55, AQo, AJo, A9s, A8s and JTs+ (Hand Range 124).
  With 25bb, there is a high increase in VPIP compared to 15bb. At this stack depth hands that
can flop good top pairs, straight draws and flush draws, such as J8s, T8s and 98s, start opening,
but 44 and 33 are folded due to being too deep to open jam them (Hand Range 125).
    Hand Range 124: LJ 15bb
• All-in 4.9% / • Raise 2x 15.3% /
           • Fold 79.8%
   Hand Range 125: LJ 25bb
• Raise 2x 24.1% / • Fold 75.9%
    Hand Range 126: LJ 40bb
• Raise 2.3x 23.6% / • Fold 76.4%
                                  Hand Range 127: LJ 60bb
                               • Raise 2.3x 23% / • Fold 77.2%

  With 60bb, the LJ opens slightly tighter than with 40bb, lowering the frequency of the
marginal hands such as suited broadways, small pocket pairs and low suited connectors (Hand
Range 127).
  With 40bb, the range shape doesn’t change too much although there is a shift from high card
value to connectedness (Hand Range 126).
UTG+2 PFI Strategy
In early position, the average VPIP drops below the 20% mark because now it is necessary to go
through at least six opponents. Many speculative hands decrease in value as the likelihood of
being 3-bet or having to play post-flop OOP increases with the number of players left to act.




                   Table 51: UTG+2 GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

  Table 51 demonstrates that UTG+2 VPIP frequency peaks at 21% between 25-30bb but
averages 19.63% across the board. With so many players left to act you should be hesitant to
open jam for too many chips because of the increased chance of someone waking up with a
premium holding. For this reason, there is an overall drop in open jam frequencies, and this trend
will continue as your position worsens.
   With 15bb, there is a tiny all-in range of 2.2% but, in practice, it is better to play a raise/fold
strategy because all hands that are jammed are indifferent to a min-raise (Hand Range 128). At
17bb the all-in range disappears completely.
   With 25bb, the baby Ax hands and the strongest suited connectors can be raised (Hand Range
129).
   With 40bb, offsuit broadways start to lose value and small suited connectors start to become
more relevant (Hand Range 130).
   With 60bb, small suited connectors such as 87s-65s and weak suited high-low card hands such
as K7s, K6s, Q8s and J8s begin to struggle. The range shifts focus towards stronger hands that
will be dominated less often, adding small pairs such as 44 and 33 that can flop premium hands
and are easy to play post-flop (Hand Range 131).




                               Hand Range 128: UTG+2 15bb
                              • All-in 2.2% / • Raise 2x 15.3% /
                                         • Fold 82.6%
Hand Range 129: UTG+2 25bb
• Raise 2x 21.3% / • Fold 78.7%
 Hand Range 130: UTG+2 40bb
• Raise 2.3x 20.6% / • Fold 79.4%
                             Hand Range 131: UTG+2 60bb
                             • Raise 2.3x 19% / • Fold 80.9%



UTG+1 PFI Strategy
In this position the average VPIP is 16.75% and peaks at 18.60% with 25bb. At 12bb, your
opening range is played almost 50/50 between a push and a min-raise.
                   Table 52: UTG+1 GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

   Play for UTG+1 is quite straightforward.
   At 15bb, stacks are too deep to jam, so only a raise/fold strategy is used (Hand Range 132).
   At 25bb, A4s, A3s and the strongest suited connectors are added (Hand Range 133).
   At 40bb, the range shrinks somewhat compared to 25bb, focusing towards hands with good
playability that can flop the nuts or nut draws. The weaker offsuit broadways start to decrease in
value as they will struggle to call 3-bets and making top pair isn’t as valuable as it was with
shallower stacks (Hand Range 134).
   At 60bb, the range is again tighter than compared to 40bb. Offsuit broadways become almost
unplayable, as do suited connectors. The range focus shifts towards raw high equity and good
blocker type hands (Hand Range 135).
 Hand Range 132: UTG+1 15bb
• All-in 0.5% / • Raise 2x 15.1% /
           • Fold 84.3%
Hand Range 133: UTG+1 25bb
• Raise 2x 18.6% / • Fold 81.4%
Hand Range 134: UTG+1 40bb
• Raise 2x 17.6% / • Fold 82.4%
                               Hand Range 135: UTG+1 60bb
                               • Raise 2x 16.5% / • Fold 83%



UTG PFI Strategy
Unsurprisingly, UTG has the tightest range of all positions, with an average of 15.42% VPIP
across all stack depths. As the stacks get deeper, there is not much of an increase in VPIP.
Instead, the type of hands that are played differs. With shallower stacks, the focus is on high
equity hands and good blockers and with deeper stacks, the focus is on hands that can make the
nuts or nut draws.




                     Table 53: UTG GTO Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

   Table 53 shows that the UTG average VPIP is 15.22%. With 10-14bb UTG plays a mixed
strategy that involves min-raising and open jamming. With more than 15bb, the all-in range
disappears and the strategy becomes raise/fold only. The VPIP frequency peaks at 20-30bb
stacks and then starts to decrease again with deeper stacks. As stacks get deeper, there is a
decrease in the RFI frequency for offsuit broadways and an increase in suited connectors and
small pairs, although the frequency is really small as their main purpose is to provide better
board coverage (Hand Ranges 136-139).
  Hand Range 136: UTG 15bb
• Raise 2x 14.1% / • Fold 85.9%
  Hand Range 137: UTG 25bb
• Raise 2x 16.8% / • Fold 83.2%
  Hand Range 138: UTG 40bb
• Raise 2x 15.8% / • Fold 84.2%
            Hand Range 139: UTG 60bb
          • Raise 2x 15.2% / • Fold 84.2%




08




MTT EQUILIBRIUM
STRATEGIES: DEFENSE
Defending vs Open Raises

Defending correctly against open raises is vital in all poker variants and even more so in
tournament poker with all the possible stack depths and positions involved.
  This chapter presents a comprehensive guide to playing from the most important positions
(BB, SB, BN, MP and EP) after someone else has already entered the pot with a raise. We will
first discuss some general considerations and then examine the specific strategy recommended
by solvers for all positions at stacks depths of 15bb, 25bb, 40bb and 60bb.



Theoretical Considerations
The following are important concepts to bear in mind when deciding how to meet an open raise.


Average Action Frequencies vs Open Raise
The following two tables give an idea of the frequency with which you should be responding to
open raises based on your position (Table 54) and that of the Villain (Table 55). Note that the
blind vs blind stats are omitted here as they will be displayed in the Blind vs Blind section.




               Table 54: Average Response to an Open Raise Based on Position
            Table 55: Average Response to an Open Raise Based on Villain Position


Facing an Open Shove
When facing an open shove there are two possibilities; either the player going all-in will have the
bigger of the two stacks or they won’t. If the total amount you have to call is more than 1/3 of
your stack, you should rejam all-in over the top, except in some very heavy ICM/Bubble
situations where you can still call and sometimes fold if another player decides to also go all-in.
   If the call is for less than 1/3 of your stack you should call with all of your continuing range or
min-re-raise if the all-in is small and you want to make sure you get heads-up. There is no need
to risk everything if there are players remaining with deep stacks. For example, let’s assume
UTG jams for 6bb and everyone else has 35bb. If you are in the cutoff, you can simply call the
6bb and expect the other players to play straightforwardly, only rejamming with their best hands,
expecting you to call off with most of your range. Of course, you will have some junk in your
range, but you will also have all the premium hands.

    The range of hands you can call off depends on the pot odds you are getting, your
  position, and the position of the player who is all-in. The earlier their position and the
  deeper their stack depth, the tighter your calling range has to be.

   The best way to get proficient at short stack play is to practice with different stack depth set-
ups in a push/fold app. Take note of what players are supposed to shove with, compare that to
your experience of what they do actually shove with, and then examine the ranges you are
supposed to call with from various positions. You may find that some players shove way too
tightly and others shove too loosely, resulting in you having to adjust your calling ranges.
Overcalling
When considering entering the pot after a raise and a call, play a tighter range compared to when
there is only a raise and no calls. This seems counter-intuitive because now there is more dead
money in the pot and the caller is announcing that they probably don’t have a premium hand (if
so they would have 3-bet). However, even after removing the top of the caller’s range, their
range is still quite strong and should have plenty of hands that can withstand a 3-bet. For this
reason, 3-betting with too many marginal hands will be detrimental if you will have to play post-
flop against a strong and well-balanced range.
   Since you are forced to play tighter than usual, your range more often than not will do better
by 3-betting instead of cold-calling. Still, there are some hands that retain their equity quite well
even in multi-way pots and also have the ability to dominate some of the opponents’ ranges, thus
overcalling may still be an option.

     Some hands that play well in multi-way pots are suited Ax, suited connectors, suited
  broadways and medium and small pocket pairs. Offsuit high and low card hands, such as
  offsuit gappers, K5o and Q7o, are extremely bad holdings to play multi-way as they will
  usually be dominated and will struggle to realize equity, especially when OOP.



Big Blind Versus Small Blind
Playing the BB vs the SB is a very different situation to those when the opener has position post-
flop. BvB (blind vs blind) is the only situation where the BB is in position throughout the entire
hand. For this reason, the BB’s equity realization is a lot higher compared to when they are
defending vs any other position. This allows the BB to defend extremely effectively vs the SB’s
open raises and play more hands profitably than would be possible if they were OOP. You will
find that when SB raises, it is often to a large (or perhaps all-in) size to give BB worse odds to
defend. When facing a raise, BB has the options to fold, call, or re-raise.
   Since the BB can easily defend against raises, SB will often limp, resulting in BB having the
options to check behind and see a flop in position or raise and re-open the betting.
   This section will analyze in detail the BB’s equilibrium strategies for all of these situations.


BB vs SB Push
                          Table 56: BB vs SB Push Action Frequencies

   The simplest situation the BB can face is when the SB open jams. In that case, the BB’s
calling range depends on the pot odds laid by the SB’s stack size. The fewer chips the SB is
going all-in for, the more hands in BB’s range that will have the correct equity to call, and the
more chips SB is going all-in for, the fewer hands BB has to defend to remain unexploitable. For
some who are experienced with push/fold apps, the unexploitable calling ranges may seem
tighter than usual. This is due to a combination of factors such as the bunching effect and the fact
that the SB has other strategic options (limping or raising to non-all-in sizes) which has a drastic
effect on both calling and pushing ranges.
   At 12bb when facing an all-in, the BB calls all pocket pairs, Ax, broadways, Kxs, K5o+,
Q7s+, J8s+ and T8s+. This tightens up a little at 15bb (Hand Range 140). At 25bb, the BB
cannot profitably call as many hands, so the calling range shrinks to pocket pairs 33+, A7o+,
A6s+, suited broadways, KQo and QJo (QJo has more equity vs SB equilibrium push range than
KJo) (Hand Range 141).
   At equilibrium with fewer than 30bb, the BB’s only 3-bet size is all-in. The solver likes
trapping with the bigger pairs 88+ and the rejamming range is made of high equity hands that
have poor post-flop playability, such as small pairs 77-22 and offsuit Ax (Hand Range 142).
Hand Range 140: BB vs SB Push (15bb) • Call 28.9% / • Fold 71.1%
        Hand Range 141: BB vs SB Push (25bb) • Call 17.8% / • Fold 82.2%


BB vs SB Raise
                         Table 57: BB vs SB Raise Action Frequencies

  With 40bb, the solver no longer 3-bet jams all-in and the 3-betting strategy becomes more
polarized, including the top of range, TT+ and AJ+, alongside a variety of bluffs made mostly of
offsuit hands selected to have either good blockers, such as Axo and Kxo, or good board
coverage such as J7o, T4s and 98o (Hand Range 143). Against an all-in 4-bet, the BB calls off
with 66+, AJs+ and ATo+ (Hand Range 144).
   With 60bb, the BB 3-bets almost the same total frequency as with 40bb, but the composition
of the bluffing portion of the range changes. This means 3-betting a smaller frequency of
individual hands to include a wider variety of combos, providing better board coverage (Hand
Range 145). Against a 2.6x 4-bet, the BB 5-bets 27.4%, which is JJ+ and AQ+, but slowplays
AA 68% of the time, calls with the best suited connectors, AJ and the smaller pocket pairs (Hand
Range 146).
Hand Range 142: BB vs SB 3.3x Raise (25bb) • All-in 10.6% / • Call 53.8% / • Fold 35.6%
Hand Range 143: BB vs SB 3.5x Raise (40bb) • 3-bet 12.3% / • Call 52% / • Fold 35.7%
Hand Range 144: BB vs SB 4Bet (40bb) • Call 46% / • Fold 54%
Hand Range 145: BB vs SB 3.5x Raise (60bb) • 3-bet 12.1% / • Call 54.3% / • Fold 33.6%
   Hand Range 146: BB vs SB 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 27.4% / • Call 14.2% / • Fold 58.5%


BB vs SB Limp
                           Table 58: BB vs SB Limp Action Frequencies

   The BB checks back on average 56% vs a SB limp and raises 44%. The raise size increases as
stacks get deeper, going from 2x at 10bb to 3.5x at 30bb. At deeper stack depths, the solver likes
going even bigger, but there is not a significant drop in EV using 3.5x at all stacks deeper than
30bb. I believe that using bigger bet-sizes is overkill, particularly in today’s environment where
population limping strategies are highly unbalanced and over-fold to BB raises. In fact, even
smaller bet-sizes can and should be used exploitatively vs weak players.
   With 12bb, the BB goes all-in 20.3%, raises to 2.5x 25.2% and checks back 54.5%. The all-in
range contains hands with good blockers and high equity but very bad post-flop equity
realization such as small pocket pairs, and offsuit Ax and Kx. The raising range is polarized,
made of hands that are happy to raise/call and a variety of hands with good board coverage that
are fine to raise/fold. At this stack depth, the solver checks back any suited hand that is not happy
to raise/call so the BB doesn’t have equity denied when jammed on. The 15bb range (Hand
Ranges 147-148) is tighter but similar.
   With 25bb, the BB jams at a lower frequency than at 12bb, but the hands the solver chooses to
jam follow the same pattern of hands with blockers with bad post-flop equity realization as well
as small pocket pairs. The raising range includes a small frequency of some of the worst suited
hands such as J4s, 96s and 62s that give the BB better post-flop playability (Hand Ranges 149-
150).
   With 40bb and 60bb, the BB has no all-in range vs a SB limp, and the raising range includes a
wider variety of both suited and offsuit hands that have a combination of blockers and good
board coverage. These stack depths are deep enough for the BB to call a SB limp/raise with
many suited hands due to being in position, so being re-raised isn’t such a disaster because the
best suited hands can always call and play post-flop (Hand Ranges 151-154).




   Hand Range 147: BB vs SB Limp (15bb) • All-in 8.2% / • Raise 3x 33.7% / • Check 58.1%
Hand Range 148: BB vs SB Limp/Push (15bb) • Call 43.4% / • Fold 56.6%
Hand Range 149: BB vs SB Limp (25bb) • All-in 4.4% / • Raise 3.3x 37.8% / • Check 57.8%
Hand Range 150: BB vs SB Limp-Push (25bb) • Call 29.8% / • Fold 70.2%
Hand Range 151: BB vs SB Limp (40bb) • Raise 3.5x 44% / • Check 56%
Hand Range 152: BB vs SB Limp-Raise (40bb) • All-in 11.1% / • Call 39.3% / • Fold 49.6%
Hand Range 153: BB vs SB Limp (60bb) • Raise 3.5x 43.8% / • Check 56.2%
Hand Range 154: BB vs SB Limp-Raise (60bb) • All-in 4.1% / • 4-bet 2.2x 1.4% / • Call 41.5% /
                                      • Fold 53%



Defending the Big Blind Versus IP Player
                         Table 59: BB vs IP Action Frequencies (15bb)


Defending the BB Versus IP (15bb)
With 15bb, the average BB fold vs a min-raise is 22.56%. At this stack depth, the BB is too
shallow to have a non-all-in 3-betting range. Something interesting to note is how the all-in
frequency decreases as the opponent’s range gets stronger, going from 18% vs the BN to only
7.4% vs UTG, but the overall BB VPIP frequency remains constant because the BB calling
frequency increases as the all-in frequency decreases.
   The solver likes going all-in pre-flop at this stack depth with hands that are ahead of the
opener’s range but have bad post-flop equity realization and thus perform better by getting the
money in pre-flop. Most pocket pairs make great rejamming hands except AA and KK, which
get slowplayed vs LP, and the smaller pairs are played using a mixed strategy vs EP. Offsuit Ax
are great rejams vs LP, but the fold equity vs EP is lower and so they get replaced by suited Ax.

    It’s important to notice how observing the kicker can help understand the way the solver
  chooses to rejam hands with blockers.

   For example, hands such as KQs have great equity vs calling ranges, but the solver likes
calling it from the BB vs all positions, even vs a wide range from the BN. Instead, the solver
rejams K5s-K3s. The reason for this is simply that the stronger Kx will have a higher chance of
coolering the BN post-flop, plus they have way more post-flop playability, significantly
increasing their equity realization. So, when choosing which king-high blockers to use, the solver
prefers the ones with weak kickers that benefit from having fold equity yet still have fine equity
against the opponent’s calling range.
   A similar effect can be seen with other hands. As an example, against a LJ raise, the solver
will choose to rejam the top of the range (AKs-AJs), flat (ATs-A6s and A2s) and then rejam
(A5s-A3s). The hands in the top of the range such as AKs are simply too strong not to rejam,
hands in the middle such as A9s play well post-flop and will dominate a lot of the BN range,
while A4s makes a great rejamming hand because it benefits from having fold equity and will
fare well enough vs the LJ calling range (Hand Ranges 155-158).




         Hand Range 155: BB vs BN (15bb) • All-in 18% / • Call 58.2% / • Fold 23.8%
Hand Range 156: BB vs CO (15bb) • All-in 16.4% / • Call 60.4% / • Fold 23.2%
Hand Range 157: BB vs LJ (15bb) • All-in 11% / • Call 66.7% / • Fold 23.3%
     Hand Range 158: BB vs UTG (15bb) • All-in 7.4% / • Call 70.6% / • Fold 22%


Defending the BB Versus IP (25bb)
                         Table 60: BB vs IP Action Frequencies (25bb)

  With 25bb, the average BB fold vs a min-raise is 22.54%, increasing from 14.6% vs the BN to
27.2% vs UTG. The BB all-in frequency drops as the opener’s range gets stronger, from 11.4%
vs the BN to only 2.1% vs UTG, but the non all-in 3-bet frequency remains fairly constant at
around 5%, except vs the BN, which is the highest at 8.20%.
   Pocket pairs and Axo really like getting all-in. As the opener’s range widens, the weaker pairs
and Ax get to shove. The non-all-in 3-betting range is polarized, made of JJ+, the strongest Axs,
some of the best premium suited connectors, and a small frequency of offsuit hands with a
blocker, including A8o-A2o, K6o-K2o, Qxo and Jxo.
   The folding range increases drastically as the opener’s range gets stronger, from 14.6% up to
28% vs EP. This is because, at 25bb, stacks are deep enough that weak hands start having
difficulty realizing their equity post-flop from OOP. (Hand Ranges 159-166).
Hand Range 159: BB vs BN (25bb) • All-in 11.4% / • 3-bet 8.2% / • Call 65.9% / • Fold 14.6%
Hand Range 160: BB vs BN 4-bet (25bb) • Call 56.1% / • Fold 43.9%
Hand Range 161: BB vs CO (25bb) • All-in 8.8% / • 3-bet 5.5% / • Call 67.1% / • Fold 18.6%
Hand Range 162: BB vs CO 4-bet (25bb) • Call 55.9% / • Fold 44.1%
Hand Range 163: BB vs LJ (25bb) • All-in 5.1% / • 3-bet 5% / • Call 66.8% / • Fold 23.2%
Hand Range 164: BB vs LJ 4-bet (25bb) • Call 60.5% / • Fold 39.5%
Hand Range 165: BB vs UTG (25bb) • All-in 2.1% / • 3-bet 4.7% / • Call 66% / • Fold 27.2%
        Hand Range 166: BB vs UTG 4-bet (25bb) • Call 57.8% / • Fold 42.2%


Defending the BB Versus IP (40bb)
                            Table 61: BB Action Frequencies (40bb)

   With 40bb, the BB is now too deep to 3-bet all-in against most positions. In fact, the earlier
the opener’s position, the less often the BB can rejam all-in due to the lack of pre-flop fold
equity vs narrow ranges.
  The folding frequency also increases drastically as Villain’s range gets stronger, from 24.2%
vs the BN to 45% vs UTG.

     Many otherwise good players make the mistake of assuming they can profitably defend
  their big blind with any two cards vs EP opens because they view themselves better players
  than their opponents. The line of thinking goes something like this: “I can defend this trashy
  hand because my opponent’s range is well defined and I can outplay him post-flop.”

  The problem with this logic is that, even if it is true, equity and equity realization matter.
Calling from out of position with too many hands vs tight ranges in high SPR situations is not a
good combination. Most of the time, the reg in the BB will end up in difficult spots where they
have to make tough call downs. Or, as I’ve seen many times, the BB will trash a decent stack
with a silly hand trying to bluff their opponent off a big hand simply because the flop “hits” them
more often than the Villain.

     Against a non-all-in polarized range from an early position player, you should defend
  tighter and should use better hands as bluffs, while keeping your 3-betting frequency low.

  For example, if we compare the BB 3-betting ranges, it is very clear how the value range
shrinks from 99+, ATs+, and AJ+ vs the BN to TT+ and AK vs UTG. When the value range
shrinks, the bluffing range must also shrink, to the point that bluffs vs BN are made with
completely different hands than vs EP (Hand Ranges 167-174).




  Hand Range 167: BB vs BN (40bb) • All-in 3% / • 3-bet 14.1% / • Call 58.6% / • Fold 24.2%
Hand Range 168: BB vs BN 4-bet (40bb) • Call 47.5% / • Fold 52.5%
Hand Range 169: BB vs CO (40bb) • All-in 1.3% / • 3-bet 11.5% / • Call 56.2% / • Fold 31%
Hand Range 170: BB vs CO 4-bet (40bb) • Call 46.6% / • Fold 53.4%
Hand Range 171: BB vs LJ (40bb) • All-in 0.2% / • 3-bet 7.8% / • Call 54.2% / • Fold 37.8%
Hand Range 172: BB vs LJ 4-bet (40bb) • Call 48.8% / • Fold 51.2%
Hand Range 173: BB vs UTG (40bb) • 3-bet 5.8% / • Call 49.1% / • Fold 45%
        Hand Range 174: BB vs UTG 4-bet (40bb) • Call 50.1% / • Fold 49.9%


Defending the BB Versus IP (60bb)
                            Table 62: BB Action Frequencies (60bb)

  With 60bb, there is a slight increase in BB’s defense frequency (65.63%) compared to 40bb
(62.91%). This could be because some weaker hands now have better implied odds, allowing the
BB to defend wider, or it could be a function of the way the simulations were designed.

     The main weapon IP has to lower OOP EQR when stacks are deep is to overbet the pot.

   So, I would expect to see slightly lower BB defense frequencies in simulations where overbets
are allowed. In the current game, players still do not use overbets nearly as often as they should
in theory, so these BB defense frequencies will fare well in modern games. I would recommend
cutting down the weaker hands vs really tough opponents who are capable of overbetting and
applying a lot of post-flop pressure.
   At 60bb, the BB 3-betting range is less polarized than it was at 40bb, including more suited
hands with good post-flop playability. As demonstrated so far, the range changes as the
opponent’s range changes, going from 3-betting as wide as 16.80% vs the BN to only 5.3% vs
UTG and also folding vs the BN’s open 18.10% of the time and 44.10% vs UTG.
   When facing 4-bets, the BB has a healthy flatting range vs LP, but could easily only 5-bet or
fold vs EP (Hand Ranges 175-182).
Hand Range 175: BB vs BN (60bb) • 3-bet 16.8% / • Call 65.1% / • Fold 18.10%
Hand Range 176: BB vs BN 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 24.2% / • Call 40.5% / • Fold 35.2%
Hand Range 177: BB vs CO (60bb) • 3-bet 11.7% / • Call 63.1% / • Fold 25.20%
Hand Range 178: BB vs CO 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 27.9% / • Call 36.5% / • Fold 35.6%
Hand Range 179: BB vs LJ (60bb) • 3-bet 7.4% / • Call 56.5% / • Fold 36%
Hand Range 180: BB vs LJ 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 36.6% / • Call 13.1% / • Fold 50.4%
Hand Range 181: BB vs UTG (60bb) • 3-bet 5.3% / • Call 50.6% / • Fold 44.1%
     Hand Range 182: BB vs UTG 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 40.3% / • Call 6.1% / • Fold 53.7%



Defending the Small Blind
Defending the SB (15bb)
On average, the SB should VPIP 22% hands at 15bb, playing 3-bet or jam vs LP opens,
rejamming as much as 28.2% against the BN and 22.5% against the CO. Against middle position
and earlier, the opener’s range starts to become strong enough such that the SB rejams won’t get
enough folds, so the solver chooses to start calling some hands that are no longer profitable
rejams but are profitable calls. So, the 3-betting frequency decreases while the flatting frequency
increases as the opener’s range gets stronger.




                            Table 63: SB Action Frequencies (15bb)

  Because the BB will frequently call once the SB calls, hands such as suited connectors, small
suited Ax, and broadway hands make great calls vs the earlier positions because they retain their
equity well in multi-way pots. It’s interesting to notice how AA gets slowplayed by the SB 25-
33% of the time (Hand Ranges 183-186).
Hand Range 183: SB vs BN (15bb) • All-in 28.2% / • Call 0.0% / • Fold 71.8%
Hand Range 184: SB vs CO (15bb) • All-in 22.5% / • Call 0.1% / • Fold 77.4%
Hand Range 185: SB vs LJ (15bb) • All-in 14.7% / • Call 5.4% / • Fold 79.9%
     Hand Range 186: SB vs UTG (15bb) • All-in 9.4% / • Call 11.6% / • Fold 79%


Defending the SB (25bb)
                           Table 64: SB Action Frequencies (25bb)

  With 25bb, the same trends seen previously occur where the SB gets to VPIP less often as the
opener’s range gets stronger.
  Offsuit hands are mostly folded except for the Ax holdings that are rejammed vs LP. Offsuit
broadways can be called vs LP, but have to be folded vs EP. Small pocket pairs make great
rejamming hands vs LP but play better as calls vs EP due to the lack of fold equity. Be sure to
take note of how SB chooses decently strong hands such as A5s-A2s, AJo and ATo to 3-bet/fold
vs EP, whereas the 3-bet fold range against the BN is A8o-A3o, KJo and KTo (Hand Ranges
187-194).
Hand Range 187: SB vs BN (25bb) • All-in 14.2% / • 3-bet 6.5% / • Call 6% / • Fold 73.2%
Hand Range 188: SB vs BN 4-bet (25bb) • Call 58.2% / • Fold 41.8%
Hand Range 189: SB vs CO (25bb) • All-in 11.2% / • 3-bet 5.5% / • Call 9.9% / • Fold 73.3%
Hand Range 190: SB vs CO 4-bet (25bb) • Call 57.9% / • Fold 42.1%
Hand Range 191: SB vs LJ (25bb) • All-in 6.4% / • 3-bet 5.3% / • Call 12.6% / • Fold 75.7%
Hand Range 192: SB vs LJ 4-bet (25bb) • Call 59.1% / • Fold 40.9%
Hand Range 193: SB vs UTG (25bb) • All-in 3.5% / • 3-bet 4.8% / • Call 14.2% / • Fold 77.5%
            Hand Range 194: SB vs UTG 4-bet (25bb) • Call 52.8% / • Fold 47.2%


Defending the SB (40bb)
With 40bb, the SB has a tiny 3-bet all-in range vs late and middle position including hands such
as 88-66, 44, 33, AQo, AJo, A4s, A3s, KJs, KTs, QTs and JTs, but the range is so small that, in
practice, I prefer to not have a 3-bet all-in range at all.
                            Table 65: SB Action Frequencies (40bb)

  At this stack depth, the SB calling range remains constant vs all positions, around the 12.21%
average. The main difference being that medium Axo and offsuit broadways get folded vs EP
while they sometimes get called vs LP.
  The non-all-in 3-betting range increases drastically from 6.6% vs UTG to 14.1% vs the BN,
with the SB expanding its value range vs the BN to include hands such as AQs-ATs, AJo and
55+ and the 3-bet/fold range to include A9o-A7o, K7s-K5s and offsuit broadways (Hand Ranges
195-202).
Hand Range 195: SB vs BN (40bb) • All-in 2.3% / • 3-bet 14.1% / • Call 11.7% / • Fold 71.8%
Hand Range 196: SB vs BN 4-bet (40bb) • Call 52.8% / • Fold 47.2%
Hand Range 197: SB vs CO (40bb) • All-in 1% / • 3-bet 12.1% / • Call 12.7% / • Fold 74.2%
Hand Range 198: SB vs CO 4-bet (40bb) • Call 49.1% / • Fold 50.9%
Hand Range 199: SB vs LJ (40bb) • All-in 1% / • 3-bet 8% / • Call 12.2% / • Fold 78.8%
Hand Range 200: SB vs LJ 4-bet (40bb) • Call 50.8% / • Fold 49.2%
Hand Range 201: SB vs UTG (40bb) • 3-bet 6.6% / • Call 12.7% / • Fold 80.7%
        Hand Range 202: SB vs UTG 4-bet (40bb) • Call 49.2% / • Fold 50.8%


Defending the SB (60bb)
                            Table 66: SB Action Frequencies (60bb)

   The average SB VPIP is 24%, going from 33.4% VPIP vs the BN to 19.4% vs UTG. As the
stacks get deeper, there is a preference towards 3-betting hands with better post-flop playability,
given the high likelihood that the play will get to the flop, forcing the SB to play post-flop OOP.
Also, since IP is too deep to 4-bet jam, the SB will be able to call many hands vs a 4-bet and play
post-flop with high equity hands that play well in 4-bet pots (Hand Ranges 203-210).
Hand Range 203: SB vs BN (60bb) • 3-bet 16.2% / • Call 17.2% / • Fold 66.6%
Hand Range 204: SB vs BN 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 19.3% / • Call 53.8% / • Fold 26.9%
Hand Range 205: SB vs CO (60bb) • 3-bet 12.3% / • Call 15.6% / • Fold 72.2%
Hand Range 206: SB vs CO 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 20.6% / • Call 41.8% / • Fold 37.6%
Hand Range 207: SB vs LJ (60bb) • 3-bet 8.1% / • Call 13.9% / • Fold 78.1%
Hand Range 208: SB vs LJ 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 36.5% / • Call 22.1% / • Fold 41.4%
Hand Range 209: SB vs UTG (60bb) • 3-bet 5.6% / • Call 13.8% / • Fold 80.6%
   Hand Range 210: SB vs UTG 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 38.5% / • Call 13.9% / • Fold 47.6%



Defending the Button
Defending the BN (15bb)
                           Table 67: BN Action Frequencies (15bb)

  With 15bb, the BN VPIP is, on average, 15% of hands. The calling range remains constant at
5% with the hands consisting mostly of middle to small pocket pairs, suited broadways, suited
Ax and slow played AA (Hand Ranges 211-213).
Hand Range 211: BN vs CO (15bb) • All-in 14.3% / • Call 4.1% / • Fold 81.6%
Hand Range 212: BN vs LJ (15bb) • All-in 10.6% / • Call 4% / • Fold 85.4%
     Hand Range 213: BN vs UTG (15bb) • All-in 10.6% / • Call 4% / • Fold 85.4%


Defending the BN (25bb)
                            Table 68: BN Action Frequencies (25bb)

   With 25bb, the BN gets to VPIP 21% of hands, rejamming aggressively vs the CO at 5.9%,
but almost never vs UTG at 1.2%. In practice, the rejamming ranges are so small vs EP that I
prefer to scrap them and play a simpler, easier to implement strategy.
   The non-all-in 3-betting range remains constant at roughly 3.32%, as well as the calling range
at roughly 14.22%. The flatting hands have great equity and will benefit from having position
post-flop, including small and medium pocket pairs, suited Ax, suited connectors and broadways
plus some traps with AA and KK (Hand Ranges 214-219).
Hand Range 214: BN vs CO (25bb) • All-in 5.9% / • 3-bet 3% / • Call 13.5% / • Fold 77.5%
Hand Range 215: BN vs CO 4-bet (25bb) • Call 58.9% / • Fold 41.1%
Hand Range 216: BN vs LJ (25bb) • All-in 3.5% / • 3-bet 3.5% / • Call 13.8% / • Fold 79.3%
Hand Range 217: BN vs LJ 4-bet (25bb) • Call 56.3% / • Fold 43.7%
Hand Range 218: BN vs UTG (25bb) • All-in 1.2% / • 3-bet 3.7% / • Call 14.6% / • Fold 80.5%
       Hand Range 219: BN vs UTG 4-bet (25bb) • Call 59.3% / • Fold 40.7%


Defending the BN (40bb)
                            Table 69: BN Action Frequencies (40bb)

   With 40bb, the BN has no all-in 3-betting range. The VPIP frequency increases depending on
the opener’s range strength, going from 21.1% vs UTG to 27.1% vs the CO. In this instance,
both the 3-betting and the calling ranges increase in a linear fashion.
   The 3-betting range is polarized, focusing on offsuit Ax with medium kickers and offsuit
broadways vs LP and replacing those with suited Ax vs EP, with middle to low Kxs usually
making great bluffing hands. The calling range includes middle to small pocket pairs, Axs, suited
connectors and suited broadways and incorporates offsuit broadways vs LP (Hand Ranges 220-
225).
Hand Range 220: BN vs CO (40bb) • 3-bet 7.5% / • Call 19.6% / • Fold 72.9%
Hand Range 221: BN vs CO 4-bet (40bb) • Call 50.1% / • Fold 49.9%
Hand Range 222: BN vs LJ (40bb) • 3-bet 6.9% / • Call 16.9% / • Fold 76.3%
Hand Range 223: BN vs LJ 4-bet (40bb) • Call 50.3% / • Fold 49.7%
Hand Range 224: BN vs UTG (40bb) • 3-bet 5.2% / • Call 15.9% / • Fold 78.9%
       Hand Range 225: BN vs UTG 4-bet (40bb) • Call 49.6% / • Fold 50.4%


Defending the BN (60bb)
                            Table 70: BN Action Frequencies (60bb)

   With 60bb the BN VPIP frequency maintains the same pattern as seen before, increasing as
the opener range weakens. The calling frequency remains more or less constant, but the 3-betting
frequency lowers as the opener’s range gets stronger.
   The BN 3-betting range is very polarized, but given stacks allow for post-flop play you still
don’t want to be 3-betting a lot of trash and having to play post-flop deep-stacked with very low
equity hands against a strong range.
   The BN 60bb calling range will maintain a similar shape to the 40bb range, flatting a lot of
pocket pairs, suited connectors and suited broadways (Hand Ranges 226-231).
Hand Range 226: BN vs CO (60bb) • 3-bet 11.5% / • Call 16.9% / • Fold 71.6%
Hand Range 227: BN vs CO 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 31.1% / • Call 18.7% / • Fold 50.3%
Hand Range 228: BN vs LJ (60bb) • 3-bet 8.6% / • Call 15.6% / • Fold 75.8%
Hand Range 229: BN vs LJ 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 33.5% / • Call 16.5% / • Fold 50.1%
Hand Range 230: BN vs UTG (60bb) • 3-bet 5.5% / • Call 16.3% / • Fold 78.3%
  Hand Range 231: BN vs UTG 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 35.8% / • Call 11.7% / • Fold 52.4%



Defending the Cutoff
Defending the CO (15bb)
                           Table 71: CO Action Frequencies (15bb)

   With 15bb, the CO has no flatting range because, unlike the BN, the CO has to worry about
the BN calling or squeezing behind him. Splitting the CO’s range represents a higher risk so,
with 15bb, the best way to approach this situation is to simply rejam the entire playable range,
increasing from 8.3% vs UTG (rejamming 66+, AJo+, ATs+, KTs+, QJs) to 13.3% vs the HJ
(adding A9s, A5s, ATo and KQo) (Hand Ranges 232-233).
Hand Range 232: CO vs LJ (15bb) • All-in 11.7% / • Fold 88.3%
         Hand Range 233: CO vs UTG (15bb) • All-in 8.3% / • Fold 88.7%


Defending the CO (25bb)
                            Table 72: CO Action Frequencies (25bb)

   With 25bb, the CO rejams a narrow range so, in practice, I prefer scrapping it and playing a 3-
bet/call/fold strategy instead.
   The CO 3-bets non-all-in an average of 3.78% hands. This range is also quite narrow and
polarized. The CO flats 10.08% on average with a capped range including mid to small pairs,
suited broadways, ATo+ and KJo+
   Flatting a capped range is not a big problem because the CO gains protection from the strength
of the opener’s range. It is important to notice how the CO’s flatting range remains fairly
constant. Unlike the BN, the CO has to worry about having to play OOP post-flop, and that
limits the number of hands that can be peeled even vs wide ranges (Hand Ranges 234-237).
Hand Range 234: CO vs LJ (25bb) • All-in 2.8% / • 3-bet 3.8% / • Call 10% / • Fold 83.4%
Hand Range 235: CO vs LJ 4-bet (25bb) • Call 59.7% / • Fold 40.3%
Hand Range 236: CO vs UTG (25bb) • All-in 1.2% / • 3-bet 4.2% / • Call 9.7% / • Fold 85%
       Hand Range 237: CO vs UTG 4-bet (25bb) • Call 57.2% / • Fold 42.8%


Defending the CO (40bb)
                            Table 73: CO Action Frequencies (40bb)

   With 40bb, the CO plays a 3-bet/call/fold strategy. The 3-betting range is polarized; 3-betting
4.9% vs UTG and increasing the frequency to 6.7% vs the HJ. The best bluffing hands are mid to
low suited Ax and Kx, AJo, ATo, and KQo, incorporating KJo and K9s-J9s as well as widening
the value range to 88+ and AQo+ vs wider ranges.
   The flat-calling range mostly consists of mid to small pocket pairs, suited Ax, suited
broadways and premium suited connectors, slow playing AA and AKs from time to time (Hand
Ranges 238-241).
Hand Range 238: CO vs LJ (40bb) • 3-bet 6.2% / • Call 12.3% / • Fold 81.5%
Hand Range 239: CO vs LJ 4-bet (40bb) • Call 50.9% / • Fold 49.1%
Hand Range 240: CO vs UTG (40bb) • 3-bet 4.9% / • Call 12.8% / • Fold 82.3%
       Hand Range 241: CO vs UTG 4-bet (40bb) • Call 49.9% / • Fold 50.8%


Defending the CO (60bb)
                           Table 74: CO Action Frequencies (60bb)

   The CO 3-betting range is focused towards blocker hands, with a small frequency of suited
and offsuit Ax and Kx, opting to flat call with suited broadways, suited Ax, suited connectors,
pocket pairs and AKo-AJo.
   When facing an UTG 4-bet, the CO tends to get most of their continuing range all-in pre-flop
(39%), with a small calling range of 7.7%. When facing a HJ 4-bet, the CO’s calling range
increases to 22% and the all-in range decreases to 29%, choosing to slow play AA. One of the
main reasons for this is that the CO’s 3-betting range vs UTG is more polarized than the 3-
betting range vs the LJ, and so most hands play better as a 5-bet than as a call (Hand Ranges
242-245).
Hand Range 242: CO vs LJ (60bb) • 3-bet 7.5% / • Call 11.7% / • Fold 80.8%
Hand Range 243: CO vs LJ 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 29.3% / • Call 22.2% / • Fold 48.5%
Hand Range 244: CO vs UTG (60bb) • 3-bet 5.2% / • Call 13.0% / • Fold 81.8%
    Hand Range 245: CO vs UTG 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 39.1% / • Call 7.7% / • Fold 53.2%



Defending the Hijack
Defending the HJ (15bb)
Defending from the HJ vs open raises with 15bb involves rejamming a linear range with an
average frequency of 9.3%, rejamming 8.5% vs UTG with 66+ AJo+, ATs+, KTs and QJs,
adding A9s, KQo and JTs vs the HJ (Hand Ranges 246-247).
           Table 75: HJ Action Frequencies (15bb)




Hand Range 246: HJ vs LJ (15bb) • All-in 10.4% / • Fold 89.6%
Hand Range 247: HJ vs UTG (15bb) • All-in 8.5% / • Fold 91.5%




           Table 76: HJ Action Frequencies (25bb)
   With 25bb, the GTO strategy rejams 1.45% on average. Again, this frequency is so low that,
in practice, it is better to ignore the all-in range and instead play a 3-bet/call/fold strategy. If a
hand is played with a mixed strategy between call/rejam, play it as a pure call, and if the mixed
strategy involves a 3-bet non-all-in/rejam, play it as a pure non-all-in 3-bet.
   The 4.43% on average 3-betting range is polarized, including the top of the range and a variety
of bluffs such as ATs-A7s, AJo, ATo, KTs, K9s, and KQo. Notice this range is slightly stronger
than it was from the later positions, CO and BN.
  The calling range averages 7.25% and includes hands such as mid pocket pairs 99-55, AQo,
AJo, KQo, suited broadways and some suited Ax including AQs-A8s, A7s, A5s and A4s (Hand
Ranges 248-251).
Hand Range 248: HJ vs LJ (25bb) • All-in 1.8% / • 3-bet 4.5% / • Call 7.3% / • Fold 86.4%
Hand Range 249: HJ vs LJ 4-bet (25bb) • Call 59.4% / • Fold 40.6%
Hand Range 250: HJ vs UTG (25bb) • All-in 1.1% / • 3-bet 3.9% / • Call 8% / • Fold 87%
        Hand Range 251: HJ vs UTG 4-bet (25bb) • Call 62.9% / • Fold 37.1%


Defending the HJ (40bb)
                           Table 77: HJ Action Frequencies (40bb)

   With 40bb, the HJ 3-bets 5.48% on average with a polarized range. The 3-bet/folds are mid to
low suited Ax, AJo, ATo, KQo, and some Kxs.
   The calling range includes pocket pairs, AQo, AJo, KQo, suited broadways and suited
connectors. The frequency with which the suited connectors are called increases as the initial
raiser’s range is wider (Hand Ranges 252-255).
Hand Range 252: HJ vs LJ (40bb) • 3-bet 6.1% / • Call 9.2% / • Fold 84.7%
Hand Range 253: HJ vs LJ 4-bet (40bb) • Call 51% / • Fold 49%
Hand Range 254: HJ vs UTG (40bb) • 3-bet 4.9% / • Call 8.9% / • Fold 86.3%
        Hand Range 255: HJ vs UTG 4-bet (40bb) • Call 49.2% / • Fold 50.8%


Defending the HJ (60bb)
                           Table 78: HJ Action Frequencies (60bb)

  With 60bb the HJ 3-bets 6.13% on average, 3-betting the highest frequency vs the LJ (7.4%)
and the lowest frequency vs UTG (5.20%). The 3-betting range is polarized but the 3-bet/fold
range consists of high equity hands with good blockers and decent post-flop playability such as
AQo- ATo, A9s- A5s, KQo, KJs-K8s.
  The calling range includes pocket pairs, AQo-AJo, KQo, suited broadways, suited Ax and a
small frequency of premium suited connectors.
   When facing a UTG 4-bet the HJ defends mostly by 5-betting all-in (39.2%), calling a small
frequency (6.9%) and folding 53.9%. When facing a LJ 4-bet, the HJ strategy involves less 4-
betting (28.2%) and more calling (24.5%) compared to the strategy played vs UTG 4-bets (Hand
Ranges 256-259).
Hand Range 256: HJ vs LJ (60bb) • 3-bet 7.4% / • Call 8.8% / • Fold 83.8%
Hand Range 257: HJ vs LJ 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 28.2% / • Call 24.5% / • Fold 47.3%
Hand Range 258: HJ vs UTG (60bb) • 3-bet 5.2% / • Call 9.3% / • Fold 85.5%
  Hand Range 259: HJ vs UTG 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 39.2% / • Call 6.9% / • Fold 53.9%



Defending UTG+1
                             Table 79: UTG+1 Action Frequencies

   With 15bb, UTG+1 vs UTG rejams a linear range of 7.1%. With 25bb there is no rejamming
range, and UTG+1 incorporates a 3.6% flat-calling range that includes JJ-66, AQo+, and suited
broadways. The 3-betting range of 5.1% is less polarized than it would be at 25bb from LP or
MP as it uses slightly stronger hands as 3-bet/folds. With 40bb, the 3-betting range shrinks
slightly to 4.80% and the shape of the range changes to include more suited Ax (A9s-A5s) and
fewer suited broadways. Conversely, the flatting range increases slightly to 4% and incorporates
more of the suited broadways than were 3-bet at 25bb.
   With 60bb, UTG 3-bets more often and calls less than it did with 40bb. The main reason is
that, at 40bb, UTG’s main response is to 4-bet all-in, which forces UTG+1 to fold many hands,
denying equity. However, with 60bb, UTG will mostly defend vs the 3-bet by calling and
playing OOP. For this reason, UTG+1 gets to realize a lot of equity post-flop and benefits by 3-
betting a wider range (Hand Ranges 260-266).
Hand Range 260: UTG+1 vs UTG (15bb) • All-in 7.1% / • Fold 92.8%
Hand Range 261: UTG+1 vs UTG (25bb) • 3-bet 5.1% / • Call 3.6% / • Fold 91.2%
Hand Range 262: UTG+1 vs UTG 4-bet (25bb) • Call 59.7% / • Fold 40.3%
Hand Range 263: UTG+1 vs UTG (40bb) • 3-bet 4.8% / • Call 4% / • Fold 91.2%
Hand Range 264: UTG+1 vs UTG 4-bet (40bb) • Call 59.7% / • Fold 40.3%
Hand Range 265: UTG+1 vs UTG (60bb) • 3-bet 5.7% / • Call 2.9% / • Fold 91.4%
     Hand Range 266: UTG+1 vs UTG 4-bet (60bb) • All-in 40.5% / • Call 4.4% / • Fold 55.1%




09




MTT EQUILIBRIUM
STRATEGIES: PLAYING
VERSUS 3-BETS

The Key Factors
When facing a 3-bet after open-raising from any position, here are key factors that should
influence your decision-making process:

  ♦ Your position: How strong is your opening range in this spot?

  ♦ The Villain’s position: How strong is their 3-betting range?

  ♦ Active players: How many players have to act after the Villain 3-bets? The more active
    players remaining, the less likely it is that the Villain is bluffing and the fewer hands you
    need to defend to remain unexploitable.

  ♦ The bet-size: Is the 3-bet an all-in bet? Do you have the option to 4-bet with fold equity?
    Do you have the right odds to call with your hand given the 3-bet size and ranges in play?

  ♦ Relative position: If you call the 3-bet, will you have position post-flop? How difficult
    will it be to realize your equity post-flop?

  ♦ Range morphology: Is the 3-betting range polarized or linear? How well does your hand
    play post-flop vs the Villain’s range?

  ♦ Risk premium: How deep are you in the tournament? Do you have a high or low risk
    premium vs the Villain? Do they have a high or low risk premium against you?

  ♦ Future game situations: If you call and lose, how does that impact your remaining stack?
    Do you lose the ability to raise/fold or do you put yourself in a marginal ICM situation
    due to the remaining stacks? Will you become the chip leader and earn the ability to push
    the medium stacks around if you win the hand?

  ♦ Bluffing: Is the Villain likely to be over-bluffing or under-bluffing in this specific spot?

  ♦ The profitability of calling: If calling is close to 0 cEV, chances are it will be slightly
    losing in terms of $EV.
   This chapter examines how to defend vs 3-bets at equilibrium but, as mentioned throughout
the book, the baseline ranges are meant to serve as only a guide. You should always be actively
thinking about all the above variables when facing 3-bets in-game, and be able to adjust
accordingly.
   Since it is impossible to include the ranges for all possible permutations of positions and stack
depths in a single book, I will present some of the most important and typical situations. Because
the ranges change in a linear fashion, make a point to study the trends and fill in the gaps for any
missing strategies by extrapolating from the ones present in the text. Again, instead of trying to
memorize fixed strategies, it is important to understand the following concepts: how the ranges
are built, what type of hands are best used for raising, calling or folding and the reason why the
solver chooses each type of hand to perform certain actions.

    By trying to understand why the solver chooses the decisions it makes, you will be able to
  make better decisions in-game, using theory to your advantage to maximize EV.

  Additionally, you should never worry about trying to execute the strategies perfectly. No
human will be able to exploit you if you do some rounding or a few simplifications as long as the
main ideas behind the strategies are applied correctly.



Short Stack 2x Open Versus Rejam (10-25bb)
The following tables demonstrate the action frequencies when facing a 3-bet in terms of your
position (Table 80), Villain’s position (Table 81) and stack depth (Table 82).
  The Average Fold after you make a min-raise vs a rejam with short stacks (10-25bb) is
55.04% and the average call is 44.96%.
                            Table 80: Action Frequencies by Position




                          Table 81: Action Frequencies Versus Position




                          Table 82: Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

   The bigger the effective stack that is being rejammed, the less frequently the opener has to
defend. The earlier the position the player is going all-in from, the tighter the opener should
defend, with the exception of the SB, which gets called lighter than the BB (this happens because
the BB has the option to call, closing the action, so the rejamming range is stronger than the SB).
When facing a rejam, the calling range should consist of the top x% of hands that have the
highest equity vs the rejamming range according to the effective stacks (Hand Ranges 267-294).
Hand Range 267: BN 15bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 42.6% / • Fold 57.4%
Hand Range 268: BN 15bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 44.9% / • Fold 55.1%
Hand Range 269: BN 25bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 29.5% / • Fold 70.5%
Hand Range 270: BN 25bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 31.6% / • Fold 68.4%
Hand Range 271: CO 15bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 45.1% / • Fold 54.9%
Hand Range 272: CO 15bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 50.2% / • Fold 49.8%
Hand Range 273: CO 15bb (2x vs BN All-in) • Call All-in 43.8% / • Fold 56.2%
Hand Range 274: CO 25bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 31% / • Fold 69%
Hand Range 275: CO 25bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 31.3% / • Fold 68.7%
Hand Range 276: CO 25bb (2x vs BN All-in) • Call All-in 31.6% / • Fold 68.4%
Hand Range 277: LJ 15bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 47.9% / • Fold 52.1%
Hand Range 278: LJ 15bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 51.3% / • Fold 48.7%
Hand Range 279: LJ 15bb (2x vs BN All-in) • Call All-in 51% / • Fold 49%
Hand Range 280: LJ 15bb (2x vs HJ All-in) • Call All-in 46.2% / • Fold 53.8%
Hand Range 281: LJ 25bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 32.5% / • Fold 67.5%
Hand Range 282: LJ 25bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 33.9% / • Fold 66.1%
Hand Range 283: LJ 25bb (2x vs BN All-in) • Call All-in 29.4% / • Fold 70.6%
Hand Range 284: LJ 25bb (2x vs HJ All-in) • Call All-in 27.2% / • Fold 72.8%
Hand Range 285: UTG 15bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 50.3% / • Fold 49.7%
Hand Range 286: UTG 15bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 52.9% / • Fold 47.1%
Hand Range 287: UTG 15bb (2x vs BN All-in) • Call All-in 51.1% / • Fold 48.9%
Hand Range 288: UTG 15bb (2x vs HJ All-in) • Call All-in 45.7% / • Fold 54.3%
Hand Range 289: UTG 15bb (2x vs UTG+1 All-in) • Call All-in 41% / • Fold 59%
Hand Range 290: UTG 25bb (2x vs BB All-in) • Call All-in 30.5% / • Fold 69.5%
Hand Range 291: UTG 25bb (2x vs SB All-in) • Call All-in 34.5% / • Fold 65.5%
Hand Range 292: UTG 25bb (2x vs BN All-in) • Call All-in 33.9% / • Fold 66.1%
Hand Range 293: UTG 25bb (2x vs HJ All-in) • Call All-in 30.6% / • Fold 69.4%
     Hand Range 294: UTG 25bb (2x vs UTG+1 All-in) • Call All-in 27.9% / • Fold 72.1%



Mid Stack Open vs Non-all-in 3-bet (25-40bb)
The following tables show the action frequencies for a mid stack open facing a non-all-in 3-bet
in terms of Villain position (Tables 83-84) and stack depth (Table 85).
 Table 83: Action Frequencies Versus the Blinds (IP)




Table 84: Action Frequencies vs Other Positions (OOP)
                          Table 85: Action Frequencies by Stack Depth

   When facing a non-all-in 3-bet with 25-40bb stacks, the solver’s only 4-bet-size is all-in. In
this situation, there is a meaningful strategic difference when comparing being in position or out
of position vs the 3-bettor.
   When IP, the average fold to 3-bet is lower than when the opener is OOP. Also, the opener
should be way more likely to 4-bet when OOP and prefer to call the 3-bet and play post-flop
when having position on the 3-bettor.
   There is also a correlation between stack depth and 4-betting frequency when the opener is IP.
In that case, the bigger the stack, the lower the 4-betting frequency and the more inclined the
opener should be to call and take flops. Conversely, when the opener is OOP, the 4-betting
frequency remains constant at ~22.84% and the calling frequency actually decreases as stacks get
deeper, going from an average calling frequency of 44.19% at 25bb to 23.03% at 40bb. This is
because with deeper stacks it becomes more difficult for the OOP player to realize equity post-
flop.
   In short, when facing a 3-bet and having position, the opener should 4-bet more with short
stacks and call more with deep stacks, and when the opener is OOP, they should fold more to 3-
bets when having a deep stack and call more when having a short stack.
   The types of hands that tend to play better as 4-bets change depending on the positions
involved. In general, the solver likes 4-betting all-in with hands that have good equity vs calling
ranges but not great playability, such as mid-small pocket pairs, big offsuit Ax and small suited
Ax. The hands that tend to do better as calls are AA, KK, suited connectors, suited broadways,
and big suited Ax. The frequency with which these hands get 4-bet or called depends on the
stack depth and the opener’s relative position against the 3-bettor. For more details, diligently
analyze the following charts (Hand Ranges 295-322).
Hand Range 295: BN 25bb (2x vs BB 3-bet) • All-in 12.4% / • Call 45.4% / • Fold 42.2%
Hand Range 296: BN 25bb (2x vs SB 3-bet) • All-in 21.1% / • Call 33.1% / • Fold 45.8%
Hand Range 297: BN 40bb (2.3x vs BB 3.5x 3-bet) • All-in 8.8% / • Call 45.4% / • Fold 45.7%
Hand Range 298: BN 40bb (2.3x vs SB 3.3x 3-bet) • All-in 10.4% / • Call 52.1% / • Fold 37.5%
Hand Range 299: CO 25bb (2x vs BB 3.25x 3-bet) • All-in 12.2% / • Call 49.6% / • Fold 38.2%
Hand Range 300: CO 25bb (2x vs SB 3x 3-bet) • All-in 19.7% / • Call 39.5% / • Fold 40.8%
Hand Range 301: CO 25bb (2x vs BN 2.75x 3-bet) • All-in 22.9% / • Call 38.3% / • Fold 38.8%
Hand Range 302: CO 40bb vs BB 3.5x 3-bet • All-in 9.6% / • Call 46.8% / • Fold 43.6%
Hand Range 303: CO 40bb vs SB 3.3x 3-bet • All-in 12.7% / • Call 45.2% / • Fold 42.1%
Hand Range 304: CO 40bb vs BN 3.25x 3-bet • All-in 18% / • Call 30.9% / • Fold 51%
Hand Range 305: LJ 25bb (2x vs BB 3.25x 3-bet) • All-in 13.2% / • Call 49% / • Fold 37.8%
Hand Range 306: LJ 25bb (2x vs SB 3x 3-bet) • All-in 18.6% / • Call 44.6% / • Fold 36.8%
Hand Range 307: LJ 25bb (2x vs BN 2.75x 3-bet) • All-in 23.7% / • Call 44.7% / • Fold 31.7%
Hand Range 308: LJ 25bb (2x vs HJ 2.75x 3-bet) • All-in 21.8% / • Call 42.7% / • Fold 35.5%
Hand Range 309: LJ 40bb vs BB 3.5x 3-bet • All-in 7.8% / • Call 56.2% / • Fold 36%
Hand Range 310: LJ 40bb vs SB 3.3x 3-bet • All-in 9.2% / • Call 58.7% / • Fold 32.1%
Hand Range 311: LJ 40bb vs BN 3.25x 3-bet • All-in 21.8% / • Call 27.2% / • Fold 51%
Hand Range 312: LJ 40bb vs HJ 3.25x 3-bet • All-in 19.3% / • Call 24.7% / • Fold 56%
Hand Range 313: UTG 25bb (2x vs BB 3.25x 3-bet) • All-in 17.2% / • Call 44.5% / • Fold 38.3%
Hand Range 314: UTG 25bb (2x vs SB 3x 3-bet) • All-in 21.5% / • Call 42.2% / • Fold 36.3%
Hand Range 315: UTG 25bb (2x vs BN 2.75x 3-bet) • All-in 22.4% / • Call 47.4% / • Fold 30.3%
Hand Range 316: UTG 25bb (2x vs HJ 2.75x 3-bet) • All-in 24.4% / • Call 40.5% / • Fold 35.1%
Hand Range 317: UTG 25bb (2x vs UTG+1 2.75x 3-bet) • All-in 22.5% / • Call 37.8% / • Fold
                                     39.7%
Hand Range 318: UTG 40bb vs BB 3.5x 3-bet • All-in 10% / • Call 49.5% / • Fold 40.5%
Hand Range 319: UTG 40bb vs SB 3.3x 3-bet • All-in 12.5% / • Call 50.8% / • Fold 36.7%
Hand Range 320: UTG 40bb vs BN 3.25x 3-bet • All-in 24.3% / • Call 26.3% / • Fold 49.4%
Hand Range 321: UTG 40bb vs HJ 3.25x 3-bet • All-in 25.4% / • Call 18.9% / • Fold 55.7%
Hand Range 322: UTG 40bb vs UTG+1 3.25x 3-bet • All-in 26.1% / • Call 9.7% / • Fold 64.2%



Big Stack Open vs Non-all-in 3-bet (60-80bb)
Tables 86-87 demonstrate the action frequencies when facing a non-all-in 3-bet in terms of your
position.
              Table 86: Action Frequencies Versus the Blinds Non-all-in 3-bet (IP)




          Table 87: Action Frequencies Versus Other Positions Non-all-in 3-bet (OOP)

   With deeper stacks of 60-80bb the all-in 4-bets start to disappear and get replaced by non all-
in 4-bets. At this stack depth the overall 4-betting frequency when having position is almost half
of what it was with 25-40bb, and the OOP 4-betting frequency lowers from 22.84% to 18.23%.
On the other hand, the calling frequency increases in both cases, as having a bigger stack makes
playing post-flop more enticing (especially when having position) and many hands are happy to
simply take the flop instead of 4-bet/fold and lose their equity in the pot.
   As seen before, with bigger stack depths and particularly when the opener has position on the
3-bettor, there is a big incentive for the opener to call the 3-bet and play post-flop IP. For this
reason, the blinds should size up their 3-bets when stacks are deeper. If they fail to do so, the
opener gets to call a very wide range and realize the equity of many hands they would otherwise
have folded. The action frequencies presented here assume the players use big enough bet-sizes.
   Playing vs 5-bets after 4-betting becomes pretty straightforward. In general, call any premium
hand and fold your blocker type bluffs. EP could very well play a non 4-betting strategy vs the
blinds because there aren’t that many hands that really want to 4-bet in position given how
polarized the blinds’ 3-betting ranges are.




Hand Range 323: BN 60bb (2.3x vs BB 3-bet) • All-in 3.5% / • 4-bet 3.9% / • Call 52.4% / • Fold
                                         40.2%
Hand Range 324: BN 60bb (2.3x vs SB 3-bet) • All-in 2.4% / • 4-bet 6% / • Call 55.8% / • Fold
                                        35.8%
Hand Range 325: CO 60bb (2.3x vs BB 3-bet) • All-in 1.6% / • 4-bet 7.1% / • Call 52.2% / • Fold
                                         39.1%
Hand Range 326: CO 60bb (2.3x vs SB 3-bet) • All-in 1.4% / • 4-bet 8.7% / • Call 58.6% / • Fold
                                         31.3%
Hand Range 327: CO 60bb (2.3x vs BN 3-bet) • All-in 2.8% / • 4-bet 15.5% / • Call 39% / • Fold
                                         42.8%
Hand Range 328: LJ 60bb (2.3x vs BB 3-bet) • All-in 0% / • 4-bet 6.8% / • Call 56.1% / • Fold
                                        37.1%
Hand Range 329: LJ 60bb (2.3x vs SB 3-bet) • All-in 0% / • 4-bet 8% / • Call 64.1% / • Fold
                                        27.9%
Hand Range 330: LJ 60bb (2.3x vs BN 3-bet) • All-in 0% / • 4-bet 19.2% / • Call 42.3% / • Fold
                                         38.5%
Hand Range 331: LJ 60bb (2.3x vs HJ 3-bet) • All-in 4.5% / • 4-bet 16.9% / • Call 34.3% / • Fold
                                           44.3%
Hand Range 332: UTG 60bb (2.3x vs BB 3-bet) • All-in 2.7% / • 4-bet 1.6% / • Call 59.5% / •
                                    Fold 36.2%
Hand Range 333: UTG 60bb (2.3x vs SB 3-bet) • All-in 2.5% / • 4-bet 6.3% / • Call 64.8% / •
                                    Fold 26.3%
Hand Range 334: UTG 60bb (2.3x vs BN 3-bet) • All-in 4.8% / • 4-bet 16.0% / • Call 43.6% / •
                                    Fold 35.5%
Hand Range 335: UTG 60bb (2.3x vs HJ 3-bet) • All-in 2.1% / • 4-bet 19.0% / • Call 38.5% / •
                                     Fold 40.4%
Hand Range 336: UTG 60bb (2.3x vs UTG+1 3-bet) • All-in 5% / • 4-bet 15.8% / • Call 28.2% /
                                     • Fold 51%




10




THE THEORY OF
POST-FLOP PLAY
The post-flop strategies and principles presented in this chapter are based on aggregated data
from thousands of GTO simulations, analyzed with custom made software. The ranges and
betting structure are representative of ante games with no rake reflecting a multi-table
tournament with stack depths 20bb to 40bb but the overall results and heuristics developed from
them are applicable to most NLH post-flop situations and can be extended to different stack
depths and other game variants.
   All the charts and metrics used in this chapter are generated from GTO solutions that are
representative of some of the most important post-flop situations, providing good approximations
that can help us better understand post-flop play. However, they are not a definite answer and
should not be taken as the final word when it comes to poker play in general. If you want to
know more about this please visit www.gtopoker.io.
   Post-flop can be divided into three streets; flop, turn and river. While entire books could be
written for each individual street even then we would not be close to discussing everything there
is to be said about post-flop play.
   I have done my best to organize the data in what seems to me to be a logical way. The
emphasis will be on finding patterns, spotting trends and developing heuristics that can be easily
recognized and applied in games across all three streets.



Theory of Betting
Why do we bet in poker? If you ask around, most players do not really know how to answer this
question. Some people bet because they feel like it. Others might bet because they really like
their hand or because they sense weakness in their opponents and think they can get away with it.
Perhaps there are many possible draws on the flop and so they want to bet for protection. While
all these reasons may be somewhat valid, they are still far too subjective.
   Some professionals and people who watch training videos who are a bit more advanced will
tell you something like “a bet has to be either for value (to get called by a worse hand) or a bluff
(to make a better hand than ours fold).”
   This definition sure sounds a lot more accurate than the previous ones, but is still incomplete
because there are many situations where betting is the correct play even if you will only get
called by better hands and will never make a better hand than yours fold.
   It is important tried to stop thinking about poker by categorizing bets as only bluffs or value-
bets because that only makes sense on the river if you have a perfectly polar range and are
betting against bluff-catchers. In all other situations, betting is more complex than that.

    Betting as a “bluff”, “for value”, etc. are results of betting, not the reasons to bet. If you
  bet and your opponent calls with worse, you made a value-bet. If they fold a better hand
  than yours, you made a successful bluff.

  Those are just possible outcomes of betting your hands against a range distribution, and they
depend on the actual holding your opponent had at the time you made the bet, which is
something you don’t control. Thus, many times when you bet, you don’t know exactly if you are
value-betting or bluffing.
  If you think about betting in a more scientific and methodical way by applying game theory
concepts, you can reduce the reasons for betting to two primary concepts:

  ♦ Leveraging the advantage of knowing your own cards.

  ♦ Realizing equity or prevent your opponent’s equity realization.


Leverage the Advantage of Knowing Your Own Cards
In a GTO poker model it is assumed that your opponents know your full strategy. So, you are
never going to surprise a GTO opponent by holding something like 72o on the flop after you
open from UTG because if you did open 72o, it would be part of your UTG RFI range and your
GTO opponents will have full knowledge of that range. In that case, you should play only solid
ranges that won’t be easy to exploit even if the Villains have full knowledge of them.

     However, even in this GTO model you still have an informational advantage over your
  opponents. You know what exact cards you have whereas they only know your range. The
  informational advantage you have is the difference between your actual holdings and your
  range, and this informational advantage is valuable when the decision your opponent
  should make varies greatly depending on your exact holding.

  For example, imagine three different types of hands you could have in a given poker situation:

  Hand type A, Hand type B and Hand type C.

  Now imagine your opponent’s correct play is to:

  ♦ Fold when you hold a hand type A
  ♦ Call when you hold a hand type B

  ♦ Raise when you hold a hand type C

   If your betting range consists only of hands type A, your opponent’s play will be trivial. All
they have to do is always fold when you bet. Similar principles apply for the other types of
hands.
   By incorporating different types of hands in your ranges, you make it more difficult for your
opponents to consistently make the correct play against you. So, diversity of range increases your
informational advantage and makes it so that you can force your opponents into making
mistakes.

    A mistake is defined as a decision they would not have made if they could see your hole
  cards, not a decision that is bad against your range.

  This is a different type of mistake that does not happen when you play against a GTO
opponent who has perfect knowledge about your strategy.
  An example of a mistake a non-GTO player could make against your range would be when
you have a perfectly polarized range (hands with either 100% or 0% equity) and your opponent
goes all-in with a bluff catcher, making your play trivial. You simply call when you have the
winning hand and fold the losing hand every time. Giving your range composition, the Villain’s
correct play against your range should be to always check, then when you bet, he has to call with
some frequency depending on your bet-sizing. Sometimes Villain will call and lose when you are
value-betting and sometimes, Villain will fold when you are bluffing. This is the type of mistake
you can force a GTO player to make even when they have perfect information about your range
composition.
   Strong ranges are ranges where the informational advantage is very valuable and that is when
the Villain’s correct play varies drastically depending on what part of your range you are holding
at that specific time.
   Let’s recall the solution of the clairvoyance toy game with $100 stacks and a pot of $100. The
EV of the game for P1 is $75. Thinking about this game from an informational standpoint, P1
has perfect information, as the opponent’s range is exactly one hand, KK, and P2 has the worst
amount of information possible. They know Villain has equal probability of having two hands
and the correct action when facing a bet is the complete opposite depending on which of those
hands Villain holds.
  Now let’s imagine P1 had only one type of hand in their range, either the nuts or air. P2 would
again have an easy decision. In this case, the action of betting would not have any value at all
because P2 would never call a bet when P1 has AA and P2 would always call when P1 had QQ.
So again, P1 would never bet. In this case, each player’s EV would be $50, but in the original toy
game where P1’s range is 50% AA and 50% QQ, betting has value, and the way to measure the
value of having the option to bet for P1 is to compare the EV of the toy game with the option to
bet against the toy game where the option to bet is removed:




   In this toy game, the strategic option of betting for P1 has a value of $25 and the reason P1 is
able to extract value by betting is because of range composition. Furthermore, if the cards were
face-up, P2 would only call when seeing P1 has QQ and would never call when P2 has AA. If
the cards were face-up, betting would not make any sense and they might as well as check 100%
and realize 100% of their equity, resulting in an EV of $50 each.
   With the hands face-up, P1’s advantage disappears. The original solution to this game is for
P1 to bet 100% of the time with AA and 50% of the time with QQ, but P1 would not be able to
execute this strategy if playing face-up. All of the EV P1 gets from betting comes from this
asymmetrical information. There is no reason for P1 to bet except for the advantage gained by
knowing their hole cards and the fact that Villain does not.
   A similar thing happens when you play real poker and there are cards still to come. If you play
your range in a manner that effectively turns your hand face-up, your opponents could very
easily take advantage. For example, imagine your betting range is heavily unbalanced towards
flush draws on a two-tone flop. In that case, the correct play for the Villain would be to call the
bet, and then play very aggressively on blank turns. So, having range diversity can be extended
to a concept called board coverage. Having good board coverage means that your range can
make strong hands on a wide variety of runouts, or all of the possible runouts if you are playing
perfectly balanced strategies.
   The entire betting and raising dynamics in the game of poker revolve around this concept of
leveraging the informational advantage of knowing your hole cards and your opponents only
knowing your range. This is going to be the primary reason to bet.

     Every time you bet, you force your opponent to make a decision and since you get to
  decide what your betting range is, if you build it in a way that the correct decision against
  you is very different depending on which part of your range you hold, then your opponent
  will be unable to consistently make good decisions and, as a result, will lose EV.

  In general, you want to construct your betting range in such a way that your opponent cannot
possibly make the right decision consistently against all the different holdings in your range. You
want to create a big discrepancy between your opponent’s EV when they call and you hold hand
type A in your range compared to when they call and you hold hand type B or C in your range.
The same applies to raising. You want there to be a sizeable EV difference when they raise when
you have hand A in your range and when they raise and you have hand B or C in your range.
That is what makes a really strong betting range. The EV of folding is always 0, so in that case it
doesn’t matter.


Realize Equity or Prevent Villain’s Equity Realization
Returning one more time to the clairvoyance toy game where P1 has a polarized range and P2
had a condensed range. As mentioned before, in this example each player has 50% equity, but
P1’s EV will be determined by how big their bet can be, and since their bet-size will always be
all-in, their EV is directly proportional to stack depth.
   If P1’s stack is 10% of the pot, their EV will be $54.6. If their stack depth is 50% pot, their EV
increases to $66.7. With a pot-size bet, their EV increases to $75. With 2x pot, the EV is $83.5.
With 10x pot the EV is $95.4. The deeper the stacks are, the more effectively P1 can use range
construction to over-realize equity and hinder P2’s equity realization. So, in this toy game, it
doesn’t matter that P2 has 50% equity. If stacks are deep enough, P1 can always get away with
capturing more than their “fair share” of the pot. Conversely, as stacks get shallower, P1
becomes less effective in denying P2 equity, which results in both players capturing a more even
share of the pot.
  Range composition is an important factor in determining how much more of their equity
players get to realize than raw equity.

     When stacks are deep, more streets are left to play and the better your opponent plays,
  the more range balance matters and the less raw equity matters. When stacks are short, all
  the money will usually go in pre-flop or on the flop which makes raw equity the dominant
  factor.

  As stacks get deeper, play will occur across multiple streets which increases the need for
constructing well-balanced ranges.
   Constructing sound post-flop betting strategies is not an easy task. Not only do you need to
preserve your informational advantage on the flop, but across all future streets too. Runout
coverage is essential for both betting and checking ranges. If you don’t have the right runout
coverage, even if your flop ranges are well constructed to make your opponent’s decision
difficult on the flop, they could still exploit you on later streets.
   Poker is a game of equity, how much you have and how to effectively realize it. Betting helps
realize equity because it denies your opponent’s equity and it also helps set up the SPR in a way
that can be beneficial to your equity realization. Range composition is always key to determine
optimal betting strategies. For this reason, in the next section, I introduce a new concept called
Equity Buckets that will help to better understand post-flop play dynamics.


Strategic Actions
Now that we understand the action of betting conceptually, we can take a closer look at the other
possible strategic actions of:

  ♦ Folding

  ♦ Checking

  ♦ Calling

  ♦ Raising

Folding

In game theory folding your hand when checking is free is a strictly dominated strategy and
should therefore never be used. Even if you think your hand is really bad and you know you will
be folding it to any future bets you should never proactively fold. Simply wait for your
opponents to make a bet before mucking your cards because no matter how bad your hand might
be, it will always have some equity or backdoor equity against most normal range distributions.
That equity can be realized if your opponents also check and allow free cards to be dealt. In
some cases, you might find decent spots to turn your hand into a bluff and take the pot down
later.
   Most importantly though, preserving the informational advantage you have over your
opponents is key. If every time you have a terrible hand you simply muck instead of checking,
then when you do not proactively fold, your opponents will know that you have a good hand and
will be able to adjust appropriately, only giving you action when they have a strong hand.
   Folding is a valid option only when facing a bet from an opponent and you assess that no other
strategic option (calling or raising) has a positive expectation.

Checking

Checking when in position is fundamentally different to checking when out of position.
Checking back the flop in position effectively removes one betting street from the game tree,
which benefits the weaker portions of IP’s range. When you are IP, checking your option
immediately realizes equity, either by seeing another card or by reaching showdown.
  In contrast, checking when OOP does not guarantee equity realization because many times the
OOP player will face a bet after checking and will be forced to fold some hands and forfeit
equity in the pot, making the need for range balance even greater when checking OOP compared
to IP. IP’s checking range only has to be balanced on the average turn card, while OOP’s
checking range has to be balanced on the flop so it can deal with possible IP bets.

Calling

Calling a bet in a heads-up pot realizes equity, either by reaching showdown or seeing another
card.

Raising

Raising a bet is effectively putting a bet on top of a previous bet, so the same principles that
apply to betting also apply to raising. You only want to make a raise to leverage the advantage of
knowing your hole cards or if raising can help you effectively realize equity or deny your
opponent’s equity realization.
  All the different actions you take convey information. Once you take an action, you can only
hold hands that would be present in the range that takes that action. One of the biggest mistakes I
see rookies make is trying to represent a hand that they clearly can never have given the way the
action has played out. This is why it is important not only to be able to hand read your opponents
correctly, but also to be aware of your own ranges and make sure to keep them well-balanced.

    If the story your opponent is trying to tell you doesn’t make sense, they probably don’t
  have it.



Equity Buckets (EQB)
Earlier in Chapter 1 we discussed range morphology, and mentioned three main range shapes:

  ♦ Linear range

  ♦ Polarized range

  ♦ Condensed range

    We also established that a range can be capped or uncapped and that most ranges will fit into
one or more categories at the same time. While this way of categorizing the ranges works well
for most pre-flop situations and can be used to get a general idea of a range’s equity distribution,
it lacks a level of detail.
    As we have seen in the game theory section, range composition is one of the most important
factors that drives the action. For this reason, I am introducing a new concept called Equity
Buckets, shifting the focus from the way ranges are categorized according to their general equity
distribution to the way hands within a given range can be categorized according to their hand vs
range equity. This gives us the required level of detail to help us better understand post-flop play:

  ♦ Strong Hands: Hands with a hand vs range equity greater or equal to 75%

  ♦ Good Hands: Hands with a hand vs range equity greater or equal to 50% but lower than
    75%

  ♦ Weak Hands: Hands with a hand vs range equity greater or equal to 33% but lower than
    50%

  ♦ Trash Hands: Hands with a hand vs range equity lower than 33%

  By putting each hand in a player’s range into an equity bucket, we get a clearer idea of the
range’s post-flop equity distribution and can be more precise about the degree to which a range
fits within the different morphologies. It is important to emphasize how a hand’s value is not
static but instead dynamic, relative to the ranges in play and the board type (Table 88).




                  Table 88: Sample Hand EQ Values on Various Board Types

   We can see how a hand such as top pair can be strong with 82% EQ on the AQT flop but has
only 60% EQ on the single suited T98 flop. A hand such as two pair on AQT has more equity
than a set on T98.


BB vs IP Equity Buckets (All flops)
Average UTG vs BB and BN vs BB Flop Equity Buckets for GTO MTT Ranges with stack
depths 20, 30 and 40bbs (Diagrams 23 and 24).
Diagram 23
                                        Diagram 24

   According to the EQB Charts across all 1,755 flops, almost half of the BB range is made of
trash hands that have less than 33% equity, while the IP Player (BN-UTG) has on average only
6% of trash hands in their range. On the other hand, the IP Player has 22% strong hands that
have at least 75% equity, while only about 7% of the BB range are strong hands. Both players
have a similar number of weak hands, 23% for the BB and 29% for IP. Finally, the IP Player’s
range has 43% good hands while the BB has only 25%.



Post-flop Bet-sizing
The main thing that sets NLH apart from other poker games is the ability to bet any amount,
from a single big blind to your entire stack, at any given point. When we discussed complex
strategies in Chapter 4 we proved that playing a more complex strategy than push or fold gains
Hero EV. The following questions are interesting:

  ♦ How important is it to have the ability to use several bet-sizes post-flop?

  ♦ How many bet-sizes do we need?

  ♦ Does true GTO play require the use of an infinite number of bet-sizes, or is there a cap to
    the EV gained by adding multiple bet-sizes and increasing the complexity of our
    strategy?

  ♦ Could it be the case that there is a GTO optimal bet-size that will always maximize our
    EV?

  NLH is a continuous game in the sense that the full game tree with infinite bet-sizes cannot be
drawn. So, in order to computationally solve any given NLH situation with modern GTO
Solvers, we must use a betting abstraction with a finite number of bet-sizes. If true optimal play
requires the use of an infinite or very large number of bet-sizes, then computational solver
applications would be quite limited, or even useless. Furthermore, as mentioned before, the cost
of implementing extremely complex strategies can surpass the value they add and can, in
practice, hurt your expectation because more complex strategies are more difficult to execute.
Unlike computers, for us humans, even more than a few bet-sizes across multiple streets quickly
gets out of hand.
   In this section we will use results from known toy games and modern solvers to answer these
questions, improving our understanding of GTO bet-sizing and use the results to develop
strategies that are both powerful and simple enough to be effectively implemented.


The Pot-size Raise
The pot-size bet or pot-size raise is a bet that lays exactly 2-to-1 or 33% pot odds to your
opponent. Betting the size of the pot is widely used in Pot Limit Omaha (PLO) as the biggest
possible bet or raise players can make. For this reason, PLO players are probably going to be
more familiar with it than NLH players.
  The way to calculate a pot-size bet is straightforward. Imagine the pot is $100, and you want
to bet 1/2-pot. All you have to do is multiply $100 × 1/2 = $50. But this gets a bit trickier if you
want to make a pot-size raise after someone else has already made a bet.
  To calculate a pot-sized raise, follow this formula:

  Match the previous bet.
  Calculate the total pot including your matching bet before you raise.
  Add that amount on top of your matching bet.


Example
The pot is $100 and Villain bets $50, how much should you raise if you want to make a pot-size
raise?




  If you want to raise to a fraction of the pot, the formula would be as follows:




  Full pot = 100%, so the pot-size raise stays the same:




  If you want to raise a different amount such as 50% pot, then the calculation would be:
  A 25% pot size raise would be:




Alpha and MDF Revisited
EV has to be compared between all the different actions a player can take and never in a vacuum.
I’ve seen many top players, and even famous poker coaches, making the mistake of using the
Alpha Number and MDF to justify making bad plays. The discussion often goes something like
this:

    “My flop bet is profitable, it only has to work X% of the time and the Villain is folding
  more than that, therefore I’m making money!”

   While that statement might be true, we cannot forget where Alpha and MDF numbers come
from. They are derived from the EV equation. They assume that the EV of checking back your
hand is 0 and that every time you are called and hold a bluff that you lose the pot and your bet.
However, on the flop most poker hands will almost always have some equity as even the worst
hands can improve on future streets. For this reason, the Alpha and MDF numbers are
misleading. In reality, the BB does not have to defend nearly as many hands as MDF suggests,
because they do not have to make IP’s worst hands indifferent to 0. IP has to make them
indifferent to the EV of checking back. Also, IP won’t always lose the entire pot when they are
called and hold a bluff because sometimes this bluff will pick up equity which makes the
continuation bets more profitable than expected.
  These numbers become more relevant on the river when there are no more cards to come and
you know if your hand has some equity in the pot or not. When deciding whether to bet or check
a hand, you need to compare the EV of both actions and take the action you think will yield a
higher expectation.

    Alpha and MDF can be used as a rough guide, but you cannot build your core strategy
  based solely on them and think it is GTO.



Splitting Your Range Into Multiple Bet-sizes
How many bet-sizes do you need on any given flop? Should you split your range as much as
possible by betting different amounts according to hand strength?

The [0-1] Toy game

The [0-1] Toy Game can be used to analyze a heads-up situation when both players have
symmetrical ranges. In this game, both players get dealt a random number between 0 and 1
(including decimals such as .04563) that represent their hand. Higher numbers beat lower
numbers. This game is played across a single street. OOP always checks to IP who can bet or
check. If IP bets, OOP can only call or fold, and cannot x/r.
   In this set-up, both players can have an infinite number of hands as there are infinite numbers
between 0 and 1. The general result is that the optimal strategy for IP is to use an infinite number
of bet-sizes based on the strength of their value hands. So IP should pick a value hand, say 0.99,
and pair it up with a bluff chosen from one of the weakest hands in the range, say 0.01. IP then
bets a specific amount that varies with the strength of the value hand, using the biggest bet-size
with the strongest value hand, the second biggest bet-size with the second strongest value hand,
the third biggest bet-size with the third strongest value hand and so on.
   We can replicate the [0-1] Toy Game in a modern GTO solver by giving both players a fixed
range of 10 hands carefully selected so there are no blocker effects:


Hero: IP with a range of A♣A♦, K♣K♦, Q♣Q♦, J♣J♦, T♣T♦, 9♣9♦, 8♣8♦, 7♣7♦, 6♣6♦, 5♣5♦
Villain: OOP with a range of A♠A♥, K♠K♥, Q♠Q♥, J♠J♥, T♠T♥, 9♠9♥, 8♠8♥, 7♠7♥, 6♠6♥,
5♠5♥
The board: 2♥2♠2♦3♠3♥ so there is no interference with the ranges.
Stack depth: 2x Pot
Bet-sizes: full pot, 2/3-pot and 1/3-pot.

   In this experiment we get the same results as the [0-1] Toy Game predicts with Hero’s
strongest hand AA using the biggest bet-size, KK using the second biggest bet-size and finally
QQ using the smallest bet-size and balancing it out with 55, and 66 using all three-bet-sizes (the
fraction of 55 in the range is not enough to make up all the bluffing frequency so a small portion
of 66 is used to make up the difference). JJ-77 are always checked.
   The Villain’s response in this toy game is to always call AA against all bet-sizes, then add
enough of all other hands to make IP bluffs indifferent to a bet or check.

[0-1] Toy Game Example A

However, this toy game has some limitations that real poker does not have. For example, in real
poker, your opponents can raise your bets so, if you use the 1/3-pot bet-size, they will know you
can only have QQ or 55 and use that information to attack your capped range by raising with a
range that is polarized against that distribution, for example AA, KK and some bluffs. This will
allow the Villains to pick up extra EV (Hand Range 337).
 Hand Range 337: No x/r allowed • Bet Full Pot 15% / • Bet 2/3 Pot 14% / • Bet 1/3 Pot 15%/ •
                                        Check 56%

[0-1] Toy Game Example B

If the Villain is allowed to x/r against the 1/3-pot bet-size, they can leverage the information
Hero is giving to take advantage of Hero’s range construction. So, Hero immediately adjusts to
never use that bet-size and QQ will shift entirely to the 2/3-pot bet-size (Hand Range 338).
Hand Range 338: OOP x/r vs the 1/3 Bet-size • Bet Full Pot 15% / • Bet 2/3 Pot 28% / • Bet 1/3
                                  Pot 0%/ • Check 57%

[0-1] Toy Game Example C

If we allow a x/r against all three different bet-sizes, Hero is no longer able to split their range
into multiple bet-sizes and will adjust to only use the full pot-size bet, shrinking the value range
to KK+ and checking back QQ-66 (Hand Range 339).
Hand Range 339: OOP x/r allowed vs all bet-sizes • Bet Full Pot 30% / • Bet 2/3 Pot 0% / • Bet
                               1/3 Pot 0%/ • Check 70%

[0-1] Toy Game Example D

If we give Hero the option to go all-in and to additionally bet pot while the Villain is allowed to
x/r, Hero will indeed split their range into the two bet-sizes:


  ♦ The all-in bet-size is used by AA 42% of the time and balanced by bluffing with 55 26%
     of the time.

  ♦ The full pot bet-size is used by KK 100% of the time and is balanced with AA 58% of the
    time, which gives IP protection from OOP x/r and with 55 74% of the time as a bluff.

  All-in is a special bet-size because it limits the Villain’s options to only call and fold. At this
2x pot stack depth, OOP cannot effectively use the information given by Hero for exploitation.




   Hand Range 340: IP All-in allowed (2x Pot) • Bet All-in 7% / • Bet Pot 24% / • Check 69%
   If we increase the SPR to 3, Hero never goes all-in and reverts back to using only the full pot
bet-size. With an SPR of 3, bluffing with 55 starts to become too expensive as OOP’s range is
strong enough to defend effectively (Hand Range 340).

Summary




                          Table 89: Summary of Toy Game Outcomes

   In Toy Game A, when the Villain is not allowed to x/r, Hero can split the betting range
between three different bet-sizes which allows capture of 56.11% of the pot.
   In Toy Game B if we allow the Villain to x/r only against the 1/3-pot bet-size, Hero’s response
is to stop using that bet-size and their EV will reduce to 54.98%. If we lock Hero’s strategy in
Toy Game B to force the use of the 1/3-pot bet-size, even though it can be exploited by the
Villain’s x/r, Hero’s EV reduces to 54%.
   In Toy Game C, Hero reverts to a single bet-size due to exploitation by OOP x/r.
   In Toy Game D, Hero’s stack depth allows them to split their range into an all-in and pot-size
bet when the SPR is 2, which grants a small EV gain for a total EV of 55.06%. However, Hero’s
EV is virtually the same as in toy game C which only uses the pot-size bet. If we increase the
SPR to 4 in toy game D, Hero won’t be using the all-in bet-size any more and chooses to use
only the pot-size bet and there is no EV loss by restricting Hero to only the pot-size bet.
  Limiting Hero to using only the pot-size bet retains EV, while limiting to the 1/3-pot size bet
only reduces Hero’s EV to 53.27%. So, choosing the wrong bet-size loses EV.


SPR Effect
Testing various SPR results on Hero’s strategy shows a preference for the following bet-sizes
(Table 90).
    Table 90: [0-1] Single Street Toy Game Optimal Bet Sizes (Shaded boxes are all-in bets)

  ♦ If the SPR is 1 or less, the optimal bet-size is in fact all-in.

  ♦ For SPR 1-2 the range gets split between pot and all-in.

  ♦ For SPR 3 the all-in bet stops being used and the betting range gets split between 75% pot
    and 125% pot

  ♦ For SPR 5 to 10 the betting range gets split between 75% pot and 150% pot.

   If we simplify Hero’s strategy in the [0-1] Single Street Toy Game by removing the least
frequently used bet-size from the game tree across all SPRs, leaving Hero with a single bet-size
option, the EV loss diminshes as the SPR decreases and the average EV loss across all SPRs is
0.21% of the pot (Table 91).




                     Table 91: Comparing Single and Two Bet-sizes for Hero

Conclusion
Using multiple bet-sizes is dangerous and it’s more dangerous in the early betting rounds.
Splitting your range into different bet-sizes gives away information that your opponents could
leverage against you when they have the option to raise or bet. This effect gets magnified when
betting happens across multiple streets. The way ranges interact with the board and cards to
come shift equities, as is the case of real poker. When the board runout can change the hand’s
value and there are possible blocker effects by the board or Villain’s hands blocking value hands
or bluffs, fewer bet-sizes should be used.
   For this reason we don’t have to worry about optimal play containing infinite bet-sizes
because there is always going to be a tradeoff between the possible EV gained by using the
perfect bet-size with a specific portion of your range and how much you lose by giving your
opponents additional information about your holdings.
   Even if GTO solvers can manage to split and balance out multiple bet-sizes the EV gained by
doing so is not, in most cases, substantial enough to warrant the increased difficulty for a human
player to implement them.
   I tested many different bet-sizes on thousands of post-flop GTO simulations across all 1,755
flops and found that most flops will have one or two dominant bet-sizes. If the bet-sizes are close
to each other, for example 25% pot or 33% pot, they will have virtually identical EVs, making
the solver indifferent between them. If the solver splits a player’s range evenly between two
similar bet-sizes, the game tree can be simplified by removing the lower frequency bet-size and
keeping only the higher frequency bet-size with no EV loss because most of the time the EV
difference is within the Nash distance. The same thing can be done if one bet-size is very
dominant and the solver chooses several other bet-sizes infrequently. The low frequency bet-
sizes can be removed from the game tree and the new strategy that only uses the higher
frequency bet-size will preserve the EV. Finally, if the solver splits its range between two bet-
sizes that are very far apart, both bet-sizes can be replaced by another bet-size that is in the
middle.
   Simplifying a strategy by removing the smaller bet-sizes and leaving only large ones typically
lowers the player’s overall betting frequency as many hands that are profitable bets with the
smaller bet-size might no longer be profitable bets with the larger bet-size. Conversely, removing
the large bet-sizes from the simulation leaves only small ones, which generally boosts the
player’s betting frequency.

    Both theory and practice agree with the premise that splitting your range into multiple
  bet-sizes does not add substantial EV to your strategy against a GTO opponent who can
  react properly. However, changing your bet-size exploitatively with different parts of your
  range against a player you think will be prone to making mistakes can be extremely
  profitable.


Optimal Bet-size
Is there an optimal bet-size that will always maximize your EV?
   Bet-sizing is affected by the range’s polarization and the number of streets left to play. Earlier
in Chapter 2, we went over the Clairvoyance Single Street Toy Game that shows how, with a
purely polarized range vs a bluff-catcher range, the optimal bet-size is to bet all of your chips,
and the optimal bet-size for the player with the depolarized range is to bet 0 chips (always
check).
   In the [0-1] Single Street Toy game, we saw that the optimal bet-size when the players’ ranges
are symmetrical was to bet big but since both players have the exact same range there is a cap as
to how big the bets can be and that cap depends on the SPR. But NLH is played across multiple
streets, so how would playing across multiple streets affect the play in these toy games?

Geometrical Bet-sizing

The optimal bet-size that maximizes EV for the player with the polarized range on the multi-
street version of the Clairvoyance Toy game is given by the geometrical growth of the pot. This
implies a betting structure where the same fraction of the pot is bet on each street so that the river
bet is always all-in.
   The general formula to find the final pot size after a number of betting streets is given by:




Where:
FP = Final Pot Size
SP = Starting Pot Size
R = Pot Growth Rate
S = Number of Betting Streets

   Which can be rearranged to find the Pot growth rate (R) that can later be used to find the
Geometrical Bet-size. (The proof of this concept goes beyond the scope of this text. If you want
to expand on it you can find more details in The Mathematics of Poker by Bill Chen and Jerrod
Ankenman.)
Example
Game: Live Cash game
Stacks: Hero $1,900, Villain: $1,000
Players: 9
Blinds: $5/$10 (no ante)
Pre-flop: Action folds to Hero in the SB who raises to $35, the Villain in the BB calls, and we
get to the flop. How much should Hero bet on each street if wanting to use the geometrical bet-
size?

   We need to figure out the pot growth rate (R). In this example the betting is calculated across
three streets starting on the flop, so the starting pot is $70, the final pot size when both players
are all-in will be $2,000 and the number of betting streets is 3.
   First we calculate the pot growth rate (R):




  Then the geometrical bet-size is given by:
   If Hero wants to use the geometrical bet-size, it is necessary to slightly overbet the pot on each
street:




   It’s important to notice that implementing the geometrical bet-size when stacks are very deep
results in very large bets (often these are overbets). In real poker, the ranges will never be
perfectly polarized and betting too large forces the Villain to fold the weaker portions of their
range and only continue with the strongest hands. If you bet large enough to make the Villain
only call when you are beat, you won’t be able to value-bet any more because betting will lose
you money. Thus, there is a cap to the bet-size Hero can use across multiple streets. Particularly
when stacks are deep, this cap will be lower than the geometrical bet-size.
   The geometrical bet-size only applies for situations when one player’s range is perfectly polar
(made of hands with 100% equity and hands with 0% equity) and the other player’s range is
100% bluff-catchers, which will never be the case in real poker. So, it is unlikely that the
geometrical bet-size will be optimal for Hero, but it at least gives us a good general idea of what
Hero’s strategy should be when their range is polarized: big bets across multiple streets!

Range Polarization Effect

We now return to the [0-1] Single Street Toy Game with the following set up:


The board: 2♥2♠2♦2♣3♥
The SPR: 4
Bet-sizes: 30% Pot, 60% Pot, 90% Pot, 120% Pot, All-in
Hero: IP
Villain: OOP
  In this toy game Villain always checks to Hero, but is allowed to raise if Hero bets. In this
setup both players always have 50% equity.


[0-1] Toy Game A: Hero Has a Big Polarization Disadvantage
Hero’s range is QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66
Villain’s range is AA, KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55, 44


[0-1] Toy Game B: Hero Has a Slight Polarization Disadvantage
Hero’s range is KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55
Villain’s range is AA, KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55, 44
[0-1] Toy Game C: Symmetric Ranges
Hero’s range is AA, KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55, 44
Villain’s range is AA, KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55, 44


[0-1] Toy game D: Villain Has a Slight Polarization Disadvantage
Hero’s range is AA, KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55, 44
Villain’s range is KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55


[0-1] Toy game E: Villain Has a Big Polarization Disadvantage
Hero’s range is AA, KK, QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66, 55, 44
Villain’s range is QQ, JJ, TT, 99, 88, 77, 66




                     Table 92: Hero Stats According to Range Polarization

  Hero’s EV increases as they gain the polarization advantage (Table 92). The smaller size 30%
Pot is never used and the bigger bet-sizes are increasingly used as Hero’s range gains the
polarization advantage.


  ♦ Toy Game A (Hero’s range is very depolarized): The strategy is to always check and
    simply split the pot 50% of the time.

  ♦ Toy Game B (Hero’s range is slightly depolarized): Hero can start betting ~15% of the
    time using the 60% bet-size with the bigger bet-sizes not being used.

  ♦ Toy Game C (the ranges are symmetric): Hero’s range gets split among the bigger bet-
    sizes of 90% and 120% but all-in is still not used.

  ♦ Toy game D (Hero starts to have a slight polarization advantage): the all-in bet-size
    starts to get used, but the dominant bet-size is the 120% overbet.

  ♦ Toy Game E (Hero has a large polarization advantage): all-in becomes by far the
    dominant bet-size, with the small and medium bet-sizes never used.

   If Hero’s range becomes perfectly polarized and the Villain’s becomes bluff -catchers only,
the strategies will result in Hero only using the all-in bet-size.

Multi-street Betting


[0-1] Multi-street Toy Game
The board: 2♥2♠2♦2♣ (turn play)
The SPR: 4
Bet-sizes: 30% Pot, 60% Pot, 90% Pot, 120% Pot, All-in
Hero: IP
Villain: OOP

   In this toy game Villain checks to Hero on the turn but is allowed to raise if Hero bets. Both
players can bet, raise, call or fold on the river.
   Using the same range distribution examples as in the Range Polarization Effect section, we get
the following range polarization stats (Table 93).




                      Table 93: Hero Stats According to Range Polarization

   In this set-up, Hero not only has the polarization advantage, but also has equity advantage, so
the expectation is even bigger than in the single street toy game. Also, betting across multiple
streets is always beneficial for the player with the polarized range.
   In Toy Games A and B, Hero has the depolarized range. In the single street toy game Hero
was still able to bet with a small frequency when we removed KK and 44 from their range. Here,
however, in the multi-street version of the game, even a slight polarization disadvantage is
enough to stop Hero from doing any betting at all. Despite having position, Hero chooses to
never bet, as checking back effectively removes one betting street from the game tree, allowing
Hero to get to the river with their full range. Meanwhile betting would result in Hero having to
fold some hands to a x/r. Going all-in will not help Hero either because Villain’s range is
stronger than Hero’s range and putting in very large bets with the weaker range is a losing
proposition.
   In Toy Game C, the ranges are symmetric and Hero starts using the smaller bet-size of 30%
Pot for the first time. As Hero gets the polarization advantage, the overall betting frequency
increases, and the bigger bet-sizes are implemented. With SPR 4, the geometrical bet-size with
two betting streets is 100% pot, but the bet-sizes chosen by the solver are far smaller than that, so
Hero’s range has to be even more polarized compared to the Villain for the bigger bet-sizes to
become dominant.
   In Toy Game E, Hero’s strategy is to bet small on the turn with a high frequency, combining
the polarized and depolarized portions of their range. This action is often referred to as range
merging. The reason Hero chooses to bet a merged range instead of a polarized range is the
Villain’s ability to bet the river. If Hero polarizes their betting range too much on the turn,
choosing big bet-sizes with the top and bottom of their range, opting to check back middling
hands such as TT-88, then Villain has the option to bet the river and attack Hero’s capped range
and thus to increase expectation. By betting a merged range for a smaller bet-size on the turn,
Hero gets to increase their betting frequency, minimizing the effect of checking back a weak
capped range. Furthermore, after Villain has called the turn bet, Villain will mostly check to
Hero who will then be able to check back middling strength hands, realizing their equity.
   If we increase Hero’s polarization advantage by shrinking the Villain’s range to JJ-77 (Toy
Game F), Hero will be able to bet 100% of their range on the turn. The 30% bet-size remains the
highest frequency bet-size, but the middling 60% bet-size starts to disappear, while the 90% bet-
size frequency increases and Hero even starts tapping into the 120% overbet (Table 94).




                                 Table 94: Results of Toy Game F

Conclusion

The more polarized Hero’s range is compared to Villain’s range, the more they are incentivized
to use bigger bet-sizes. If betting can happen across multiple streets, Hero is more likely to
choose smaller bet-sizes on the early streets and choose to bet a merged range, waiting until
future streets to start polarizing their betting range, unless they have a very substantial
polarization advantage. In that case, their bet-size will approach the geometrical bet-size unless
the SPR is very high because of the threat of the Villain’s range containing traps, which reduces
the profitability of making large bets. For this reason, all-in bets are rarely used on early streets
unless stacks are shallow.


Bet-sizing Based on Runout
We already know that you don’t need to split your range into different bet-sizes on the flop, but
should you have different bet-sizes for different flops?
  Different flops will have a different effect on the ranges’ equities and polarization. Our test
with the [0-1] Toy Game proves that bet-size is affected by the range polarization and also that
using the wrong bet-size can cost EV. This suggests that GTO play on different types of flops
will involve the use of flop-specific bet-sizes.
  To test this hypothesis I ran all 1,755 flops in a Single Raised Pot (SRP) BB vs BN scenario
with 40bbs effective stacks. In one simulation I used four different bet-sizes: min-bets, 1/3-pot,
1/2-pot and 2/3-pot, and got IP average EV across all flops accounting for each flop’s individual
weight, in order to represent all 22,100 specific flops (accounting for suits). Then I re-ran the
same scenario using only the 1/3-pot size. The results are summarized in Table 95.




                    Table 95: Summary of Simulations with Varying Bet-sizes

   The average EV difference across all flops is -0.14% of the pot, or 0.9 bb/100, when using a
single bet-size compared to using four-bet-sizes. However, this test compares the single bet-size
simulation to a simulation that has four-bet-sizes and can maximize the EV of each individual
combo by choosing any of the four available bet-sizes. This is different than running each one of
the 1,755 simulations using only the best of the four-bet-sizes for each flop. Still, if I had done
that, the EV of using only the “optimal bet-size” among the four options cannot be higher than
the EV of using 4 bet-sizes that maximized each combo’s EV because if that is the case, the
solver will only choose one of them even when having four options to choose from. At most, the
EV of solving each flop with only one optimal bet-size has to be the same as the EV of a
simulation that has all four-bet-sizes.
   Assuming perfect play from each player, the average EV loss using only the 1/3-pot size in the
tested set up is at most 0.9bb/100. This number could change with different stack depths and
different ranges, but it gives us a reasonable starting point, since this is the average across all
1,755 flops. It is not the same as if it was -0.9bb/100 lost on a single flop, so this number is very
significant. However, it assumes perfect play from both players and we know that is far away
from real poker, as both Hero and Villain will make mistakes.
  Some people advocate for oversimplifying their strategies with a “single bet-size fits all”
approach based on the premise that adjusting the bet-size according to the flop is not worth the
hassle, given the small, if any, EV to be gained when compared to using a reasonable bet-size
across all 1,755 flops. While I understand this reasoning, I don’t agree with the “single bet-size
fits all” approach. Yes, there might not be too much EV to be won against a GTO player when
changing your bet-size on different flops. However, you won’t be playing against a GTO player.
Putting in the extra effort to understand how some flops are different to others and what bet-size
to use makes more sense. Given the way ranges interact with the board will not only make your
hand easier to play, but it will also make life more difficult for your opponents who might not be
used to facing different bet-sizes. Even if the GTO player could defend with the exact calling,
folding and raising frequencies to make your bet-sizes indifferent or just slightly better than the
“standard” bet-size, that might not be the case for your human opponents who could struggle to
defend against non-standard lines. You won’t have that problem. If your opponent uses the GTO
bet-size or close to it against you, you have a very good idea of how to defend. If your opponent
uses a non-GTO bet-size, then you can try to exploit this suboptimal bet-size selection.


Example
You are in the BB with a 30bb effective stack, UTG min-raises, the action folds to you and you
call. The flop comes J♠2♥2♦ and you check.
   On a paired flop such as J22, UTG’s GTO play when checked to is to min-bet the flop 100%
of the time and this will generate an EV of 77.05. If your opponent instead makes a 2/3-pot bet,
they can no longer continuation bet their entire range, because if they do, then you will be able to
exploit them by switching to a x/r only strategy which will make the Villain’s EV diminish to
71.01. If they are a good player and lower their C-bet frequency to match the new equilibrium,
they should be c-betting the flop 42.45% of the time and their EV will be 74.10. If this player is
good enough to know what a good 1/3-pot GTO c-betting strategy looks like from UTG vs BB
on J22, why are they using a suboptimal strategy that loses EV instead of simply going for the
GTO line? Chances are they are not c-betting at a GTO frequency for that bet-size and their
range is probably going to be highly unbalanced, so there might be even more room for
exploitation.

    To make money playing poker, you don’t need to play perfect GTO in every single line
  and to know the absolute optimal bet-size on any given flop because your opponents are not
  playing perfect GTO themselves. All you have to do is make, on average, better decisions
  than them, enough to create a solid win rate, and keep improving so they don’t catch up to
  you.
   Most of the time the solver is indifferent to similar bet-sizes. For example, there probably isn’t
too much difference between betting 25% or 33% Pot, or 60% or 67% Pot. Most of the time it is
good enough to know if the flop is a “big bet-size” flop or “small bet-size” flop. For MTTs, I
recommend using two c-bet sizes: 1/3-pot, and 2/3-pot. If you want to play a more complex
strategy, you could add min-bets and 120% overbets to the mix. If you want to simplify your
strategy to only one bet-size, you could opt for the 1/3-pot across the board, which is in fact what
most online MTT regulars are doing in modern games. This strategy works fine against the
population as it simplifies the game tree, is really easy to implement, and it allows you to c-bet at
a high frequency on most boards. This forces Villains into making a decision, revealing
information about their range at a low cost. It also exploits population tendencies, as most people
still overfold to small bets.
   My recommendation is to become proficient with at least a couple bet-sizes (a big one and a
small one), and to understand how to implement them correctly. They you have a solid strategy
you can play against tough opponents to keep them guessing while also being able to defend well
when they are the ones using non-standard lines. Against weaker players, you can mix it up and
play an exploitative strategy. Don’t be afraid of being counter-exploited when playing against
unaware opponents because even if they knew what you are doing, chances are they won’t know
how to properly adjust to counter you. Keep hammering on them until they start fighting back. If
you think you can get away with c-betting at a higher frequency than optimal against a Villain or
manipulate them into folding or calling with your bet-size, then go for it! Always be aware and
mindful of the situation you are in.



Bet-sizing and Modern Solvers
Modern GTO solvers can be set up to solve for a specific spot with several bet-sizes, but it is up
to the user to input those bet-sizes. A GTO solver cannot figure out the optimal bet-sizes by itself
and build the game tree for us. That job is left to the user, so it is up to us to use our knowledge
and expertise as poker players to input bet-sizes that we think are a good representation of the
situation we want to model and solve the game tree within those parameters.
   When you choose the bet-sizes a player can use in any given spot, you are limiting their
actions to only those options. For example, if you input flop bet-sizes of 1/2-pot and 2/3-pot,
those are the only bet-sizes the player can use on the flop. As another example, if you don’t give
the OOP player the option to x/r the flop, if they can only call or fold, that will have an effect on
IP Betting strategy as IP now knows there is a 0% chance OOP will x/r the flop. IP is now
incentivized to bet at a higher frequency because their equity in the pot cannot be denied. For this
reason it is important to make sure all the players in the GTO simulation have proper bet-sizes
and can react effectively to most lines so that the solver’s output is not skewed as a result of a
bad betting structure affecting one of the players in a given line – unless you are actively trying
to exploit a player’s known leak.
   It can be tempting to use as many bet-sizes as you can in GTO calculations but, unfortunately,
using too many bet-sizes is impractical as each bet-size added increases the game tree size
exponentially. This makes it almost impossible for a human to correctly implement all of them in
game. Furthermore, bigger game trees increase the computational power and time required for
the GTO solver to finish the simulations which also makes the use of too many bet-sizes
impractical.
   We are faced with the dilemma of making the game trees as accurate as possible to represent a
wide range of possibilities while at the same time trying to make the size of the GTO simulations
manageable and the strategies simple enough to be implemented in game. Fortunately, we don’t
really need to test for all possible bet-sizes, as trying something like the square root of Pi would
be absurd. Most poker players bet a fraction of the pot, so bet-sizes such as 1/2-pot and 2/3-pot
are reasonable approximations. Testing for common bet-sizes and finding the ones the solver
typically likes the most could help us develop strategies that can be easily implemented while
remaining relevant to our own games.
   Sometimes the solver will show a clear preference for taking an action with a hand because the
EV for that action is clearly higher than the EV of taking any other action. Many times the EV
reported by the solver for individual combos will be virtually identical for different actions, such
as betting or checking and this can make players think that it doesn’t matter how to play post-
flop because everything is indifferent. This is a huge mistake. The EVs reported by the solver
assume both players are playing at equilibrium. If we start changing the frequencies of the hands
to a point where the overall strategy and range composition is no longer the same, the ranges
become exploitable and the EV is no longer guaranteed, as the Villain would be able to adjust
their strategy.
   Imagine a hypothetical situation where the GTO strategy is betting all hands in the range with
a 50% frequency. In this situation, you would be indifferent to betting or checking each combo.
If you take the top strongest half of the range and bet it at a 100% frequency and check the
weaker half 100%, your overall bet/check frequency would be the same but clearly the new
strategy will be a lot more exploitable than GTO. An aware opponent could start to fold more
often when you bet and attack your checks by playing very aggressively. Of course, it is
impossible to play all combos in the exact GTO frequencies, but it is important to try to keep the
ranges reasonably balanced and maintain board coverage. If the changes are too drastic, they
won’t go unnoticed, so before making any big changes to the GTO strategies, thinking it doesn’t
matter, first lock the new strategy in the solver and re-run it. See if there is any substantial EV
loss when playing against a min-exploitative opponent before implementing them in your games.
   It is vitally important to remember that the indifference between two or more actions is created
by your opponent’s play. If they are not aware that their strategies are fundamentally flawed and
unbalanced, then a seemingly close spot becomes more binary and against that particular Villain,
one given action will always yield a higher expectation than any other.




11




THE THEORY
OF FLOP PLAY
So, you’ve put in the effort into understanding pre-flop play and have a good idea of what
player’s ranges look like in general. The three board cards are dealt and you ask yourself, what
now? Well, in this section we will study the different flop types, how the different flops interact
with the players’ ranges, and what the effects of these interactions in post-flop betting strategies
are.



Suit Isomorphism
Isomorphism is a general concept that appears in several areas of mathematics. The word derives
from the Greek iso, meaning “equal”, and morphosis, meaning “to form” or “to shape”. Two or
more objects are isomorphic if they cannot be distinguished from one another by using only a
specified set of properties.
   As we saw in Chapter 1, by representing hands such as A♠K♠, A♥K♥, A♣K♣, A♦K♦ in the
same square of a 13×13 grid as AKs, and repeating the same process to all other suited hands,
pocket pairs and offsuit hands, we can effectively reduce the 1,326 combos into 169 Poker
hands. This is possible because suits only become relevant post-flop when they interact with the
community cards, and pre-flop no suit is better or worse than any other suit (they are
strategically equivalent – in other words, isomorphic).
   Based on the previous premise, there is no reason for a player to have any particular suit in
their range more frequently than any other. So, suit isomorphism can also be applied to the
22,100 specific flops, effectively reducing the game to 1,755 strategically unique flops.
   The four flops A♠K♠Q♠, A♥K♥Q♥, A♣K♣Q♣, and A♦K♦Q♦ can be studied as if they were
the exact same flop because on each of them, any given range will always have the exact same
number of flopped flushes, flush draws, sets, top pair, etc, and a hand like a flush will always be
played the same regardless of the suit. For example J♠T♠ on A♠K♠Q♠ will be played exactly as
J♥T♥ on A♥K♥Q♥.
   There are two main reasons why we would want to reduce the size of the game. The first is
that, as humans, it is easier to “learn” strategies for only 1,755 flops rather than 22,100. The
second is for saving server time in solver calculations. Instead of calculating redundant flops
over and over again, we can run only one of each type of isomorphic flop and extrapolate from
the results.



Dynamic and Static Boards
The concept of Flop Volatility was first introduced by Will Tipton in his excellent book Expert
Heads Up No Limit Hold’em, Volume1: Optimal and Exploitative Strategies (D&B Publishing).

     “So, the second important texture-related property of a flop is how likely future cards are
  to change the relative values of players’ hands. This likelihood is a property of the flop in
  combination with players’ ranges. We will call boards on which hands are very likely to
  change in value by the river ‘volatile’. Boards on which good hands are likely to stay good
  and bad hands likely to stay bad are called ‘static’.”

   In essence volatile (or dynamic) boards are those in which the player’s hand equities can shift
drastically in value on future streets, and static boards are those in which the hand equities tend
to remain relatively constant on most runouts. Low and connected boards with possible flush and
straight draws are very dynamic, and offsuit disconnected flops with high cards tend to be static.
   For example, in a typical BB vs EP single raised pot, the flop 8♥7♥3♦ would be a dynamic
board because there are many cards that can come and promote or demote the hand values in
both players’ ranges. Any heart will complete a flush, and any 5, 6, 9, T or J can complete a
straight. Also, any turn or river card higher than an 8 can make a random hand improve to a
higher pair than the flopped top pair, while on a flop like K♠7♦2♥, the hand’s value will remain
relatively constant on most turns and rivers.
Flop Classification Scheme
A lot of poker players never study the game. They learn by playing, and this is probably the best
thing to do when you are first getting into poker. However, soon you will realize that, given the
immense number of different situations that can occur, even if all you did was to play poker 24/7
for years, it is impossible to learn everything there is to learn by just playing. Many players
understand this and they take the next step by getting professional coaching, but even the best
coaches won’t be available 24/7 to answer all your questions. Even if that was the case, they
surely won’t always have the right answer to every single spot. For this reason, people have tried
to develop assisting software for years. It has already happened in games such as chess, where
players can access top engines from their computers and even smartphones to get an immediate
answer to what the correct play is in any given chess position.
   In modern poker we have access to GTO solvers and, just as in chess, we now can get almost
immediate answers as to how to play any spot at any given time. But again, we are faced with the
issue of there being way too many spots to actually study each one of them. There are as many as
1,755 unique flops for any given spot, so this methodology is highly inefficient and would take
an enormous amount of time. Thus the need for a better system.
   Classification is the process of grouping things based on their similarities to make them easier
to identify or study. Flops that share common characteristics tend to be played in a similar
fashion. In this section, I describe a full comprehensive flop classification scheme, effectively
dividing the problem into smaller, easier-to-solve pieces while at the same time keeping an eye
on the game as a whole.


Flop Structure
The flop structure is the first thing to look at when the board is dealt. There are three possible
flop structures, and post-flop play will accordingly vary completely.


  ♦ Trips: A trips flop is a flop that contains all cards of the same rank. For example:
    A♥A♣A♠, 7♥7♠7♦ or 3♣3♠ 3♦.

  ♦ Paired: A flop is paired if it contains two cards of the same rank. A paired flop can be
    paired rainbow, for example K♥K♣5♠ or paired two-tone, for example Q♦8♦8♣.

  ♦ Unpaired: A flop is unpaired if all the cards have different ranks, for example: Q♥7♦4♣
    or A♥K♥Q♠.
Flop Textures
Flop texture is also important and can take three forms.


  ♦ Monotone: A monotone flop is a flop that contains all cards of a single suit, for example
    A♥K♥T♥ or J♠6♠5♠.

  ♦ Two-tone: A two-tone flop is a flop that contains two cards of a single suit and a third
    card of another suit. There are three subtypes of two-tone flops. If the top and medium
    card are suited, the flop is said to be two-tone high-mid, for example A♥K♥Q♠. If the
    medium and low cards are suited, the flop is said to be two-tone mid-low, for example
    J♥6♠5♠. If the high and low cards are suited, the flop is said to be two-tone high-low, for
    example A♥9♠2♥.

  ♦ Rainbow: A rainbow flop is a flop that contains all three cards of different suits, for
    example Q♥9♠7♦, 6♦4♣2♠ or K♣J♦7♥.




               Table 96: All Possible Flops Categorized by Structure and Texture


Flop Rank
The flop rank will depend on its highest card. For example, Kxx represents all flops that contain
a king and two other cards that are a king or lower (Table 97).
   As we can see, the higher the rank of the flop, the more flops of that rank exist. A-high boards
are the most common, with 21.74% of all flops being Axx. Notice how 85% of all flops are rank
9 or higher while the remaining 15% flops are rank 8 or lower.
Flopped Straights
Flops can also be categorized by the number of possible flopped straights (Table 98). For
example, on the flop AQ7 there are zero possible flopped straights. On KT9 there is one possible
flopped straight (with QJ). On 875 there are two possible flopped straights (96 and 64). Finally,
on JT9 there are three possible flopped straights (KQ, Q8 and 87).




                       Table 97: All Possible Flops Categorized by Rank
            Table 98: All Possible Flops Categorized by Possible Flopped Straights

  Flops that have zero flopped straights can also be subcategorized according to the number of
possible OESDs, but for the scope of this book we will only focus on the number of straights.


Flop Families
Some flops can be grouped together into families and subfamilies according to their rank. For
example, the flops A54, A53, A52, A43, A42 and A32 are so similar that in many situations,
they can be treated as the exact same flop: Ace with two low cards.
   First let’s group all the cards according to their rank:


High Card (H): Any card K, Q, J, T
Mid Card (M): Any card 9, 8, 7, 6
Low Card (L): Any card 5, 4, 3, 2
Ace (A): The lonely A

  Now the flops can be categorized using the card ranks as follows (Table 99).
                    Table 99: All Possible Flops Categorized by Card Rank


Flop Subsets
As often mentioned previously, there are 22,100 possible flops in hold’em and, using suit
isomorphism, we can reduce that number to 1,755 strategically different flops. For practical
purposes, this number is still very large. For this reason, poker players, as well as programmers
and theorists, have attempted to simplify the game by creating smaller flop subsets that
accurately represent the whole game.
   The first publicly known attempt to develop a subset of flops was performed by the poker
theorist Will Tipton. His methodology consisted of first creating conditions a good subset must
satisfy and then finding the minimum subset of flops that satisfies all of them.
   Tipton’s proposed subset conditions:


  ♦ Any particular single card comes

  ♦ A flush draw of a particular suit comes

  ♦ A monotone flop of a particular suit comes

  ♦ A paired board with the pair being of a particular rank comes

  ♦ A three-straight board of any rank comes

  ♦ A board with any particular one-gap in the rank comes

  ♦ A board with any particular two-gap in the rank comes

   Tipton’s flop subset contains 103 flops but, unfortunately, it has some issues and cannot be
used to fully represent the entire game. His methodology makes sense and was improved upon
by others, but I found that it is simply too difficult to significantly reduce the game size while
keeping an eye on all of its characteristics. I also tried a different approach, by selecting a flop
representative of the different structures, textures, ranks, families and number of possible
straights, and the lowest number of flop subsets I could create was 356 flops.
   PioSOLVER developers Kuba and Piotr created a different methodology, consisting of
defining some metrics which a good subset must satisfy, and then ran custom software to find the
best subset of N elements that scores the best on the metrics. The metrics they used are equity
against full range, against 50% range and against AA, as well as EVs from all 1,755 flops.
   Kuba and Piotr tried several metrics and determined that a mix of EV and EQ performs better
than others including EV alone. They developed subsets of different sizes, including 25, 49, 74,
95 and 184 flops. The more flops in the flop subset, the more accurate results you will get. This
is particularly the case with high SPR, because of the different ways some elements of the range
can hit some boards very strongly and create cooler situations that will end up with the players
playing massive pots. For these situations to be accurately represented, you need to have as many
flops as possible. You can find the subsets and more details on their blog at www.piosolver.com.
   Their pre-flop subsets are optimized to accurately approximate equities and EV for the pre-
flop solver, not post-flop strategies. For this reason, these subsets are not guaranteed to produce a
good approximation of post-flop play. This is why I decided to go for a different approach and
simply use super-computers to solve the full game, all 1,755 flops in many different spots, and
create custom software to analyze the data. This chapter was written using the results from this
investigation. You can find more details of this work on www.gtopoker.io.



The Flop Donk Bet (DK)
A Villain who is IP (BN, CO, MP, EP), raises and the action folds around to Hero who is in the
BB and makes a call. At this point you should have a pretty good idea about Villain’s pre-flop
range because of their position, stack depth and any tendencies you might have noticed. You also
know what your own BB defending range looks like, what hands you would most likely be 3-
betting pre-flop and what hands you are calling against this Villain in this particular situation.
The flop is dealt and it is your time to act. Should you bet or check?

    This is by far the most common situation in poker. Most poker hands will be played
  heads-up in a single raised pot between the BB and IP. Thus playing well post-flop after
  defending the blinds is of vital importance for any poker player’s success.

  So, this will be the first post-flop situation we will study.
  In this BB vs IP setup, the IP Player is commonly said to have the “betting lead” because they
were the pre-flop aggressor. For this reason, IP is expected to continue the aggression on the flop
by betting frequently when checked to. This type of bet performed by the previous street
aggressor is known as a continuation bet (c-bet). Since IP is expected to c-bet the flop at a very
high frequency, the BB is also expected to check to the pre-flop aggressor and never take the
betting lead. When the player in the BB doesn’t check and instead takes the lead by making a
bet, the poker regulars would call this a donk bet, because it’s a bet that goes against the norm.
But does this general consensus of not taking the betting lead away from the pre-flop aggressor
make sense conceptually from a game theory perspective?
   First of all, in game theory there is no such a thing as the “betting lead”, so taking the betting
lead away from a player does not make sense in GTO. As we saw in the theory of betting,
making a bet is a function of leveraging informational advantage, range composition and SPR
with the objective of realizing your equity or preventing the opponent’s equity realization. If we
want to confirm or refute the general ideas about donk bets, we must do so through GTO
principles.
   I aggregated the data of GTO solutions across all possible flops in BB vs BN and BB vs UTG
situations in single raised pots with stack depths 20bb, 30bb and 40bb. The BN and UTG were
used because they represent the widest and tightest ranges, while strategies from other positions
will fall somewhere in between. The results show that the overall BB donk bet frequency is only
2% (for 1/4 and 2/3 bet-sizes) and the average IP c-betting frequency is 84%. The GTO
simulations agree with the general consensus about donk betting not being widely used and c-
bets being very common. However, if we look deeper into the data, there are some spots where
the solver actually likes donk betting at a high frequency (Table 100).




                          Table 100: BB and IP stats (20bb/30bb/40bb)

  On average, the highest frequency donk betting flop is 654r (67%), and one of the lowest donk
betting flops is A76r (0.3%), Why is the BB betting frequency on A76r so low compared to
654r?
   If betting was clearly the highest EV option for any hand in the BB range, the solver would
always do it. If betting is indifferent to checking, then the hand will be played as a mixed
strategy. If a hand is never being bet, it is because betting is lower EV compared to checking.
   Returning to our EV equation:




   The EV of betting a hand depends on how often Villain folds, how often they raise, how often
they call and the amount of equity Hero has when called. The stronger Villain’s range, the less
they will fold, the more often they will raise and the less equity Hero will have when called.
   The GTO solver assumes play against a GTO opponent who knows your strategy and will call,
raise and fold optimally against you. If IP’s range is so strong that they won’t be folding much vs
a bet and, in contrast, will be able to raise a lot and call effectively, then betting becomes a lot
less enticing than it would be against a weaker range distribution.
  Clearly IP has the equity advantage with 62% equity vs the BB’s 38% on A76r, which will of
course reduce the profitability of the BB’s bets, while on 654r, the BB has the equity advantage
with 51% equity vs IP’s 49%, making the BB’s bets more profitable on this flop texture.
  Range vs range equity is an important factor as it is difficult to develop betting strategies when
having a substantial equity disadvantage. However, as we discussed in the theory of betting
section, the range composition is even more important than raw equity.
  Applying the concept of equity buckets that was introduced earlier, we can go beyond raw
equity and get a better idea about the range distribution for both players across the different flops
(Diagram 25).
           Diagram 25: Average BB vs IP Equity Buckets for 20bb/30bb/40bb Stacks

     For the definition of strong, good, weak and trash hands, see the Equity Buckets section
  of Chapter 10.

   On 654r, the BB has 7% strong hands, and IP has only 4%, while on A76r, the BB has 8%
strong hands and IP has a staggering 31% strong hands! What happens is that, on A76r, IP’s top
pairs (any Ax) have on average 85% equity vs the BB’s range, while a top pair on 654 will
average about 65% equity. Additionally, on 654r, all of IP’s Ax will have an average of 49%
equity, effectively turning them into weak hands. On 654r, the BB’s good hands increase from
17% to 40% and the trash hands reduce from 49% to 18% when compared to A76r.
   Because of this distribution, the IP Player will be incentivized to lower the c-betting frequency
on 654r, given that the bulk of their range are weak hands that don’t perform well against a flop
check/raise. So, by checking back more often, IP gets to see a free turn and realize equity. The
BB reacts to this by donk betting many hands, forcing IP to either fold or put more money into
the pot with the hands that would have been happy to check behind and see a free turn.
   Donk betting makes sense on 654r because it denies IP EQR, and also helps BB realize equity
by leveraging the informational advantage of leading out with a well-balanced range that cannot
be easily attacked by IP. This takes advantage of IP’s lack of strong hands that would be happy
to raise for value. This also limits the number of hands that can be raised as a bluff, resulting in
IP having an overall low raising frequency of 20% on 654r, whereas IP has a raising frequency
on A76r of 53% (GTO frequencies vs a donk bet-size of 1/4-pot).
   Donk betting on A76r doesn’t make sense because it does not help the BB deny IP EQR. In
this case, the opposite actually occurs, because IP’s range is so strong on this board that a donk
bet can get raised with such a high frequency that the effect would be reversed. It would be the
BB who is forced to continue putting more money into the pot with hands that would rather see a
cheap turn card or fold, reducing their equity and resulting in a lower EQR and EV loss for OOP
(Table 101).
                 Table 101: A76r BB vs BN 30bb Stats for Different BB Strategies

   A76r is so good for IP that they get to c-bet 100% of their range and not worry about being x/r
too often. For this reason, the BB doesn’t need to lead out with their strongest hands to get value
as IP will keep putting money into the pot with their entire range when checked to. If the BB
starts leading strong hands on A76r, it would only help IP as they could then choose to fold weak
hands that would have continued putting money into the pot in the form of a c-bet and only
continue when it is profitable to do so.
   If we force the BB to donk every time they have top pair or better (10%), their total EV
reduces from 25 to 13, as this strategy is highly exploitable. In the GTO solution, the checking
range is well protected because the BB is never leading out but, in the locked strategy, the BB is
donking their strongest hands, leaving their checking range vulnerable. This makes their EV after
checking decline to 5.6. In this case, the BB’s EV when betting is extremely high because the
betting range is strong but betting only happens 10% of the time, while checking happens 90%.
   If the BB starts to include many bluffs in the leading range, then IP would start calling wider
and frequently raising the donk bets. If the BB tries a strategy of leading only with weak hands,
the result is even worse as now IP will be able to raise 100% of the time, making the BB not only
lose the entire pot when betting, but also their 1/4-pot size bet. For this reason, it works better for
OOP to not split their range and simply check 100% on A76r.
   If we subdivide all flops by donk betting frequency, we can get a better idea of how the ranges
interact with the flops (Table 102).




                            Table 102: BB Stats by Donk Bet Frequency

   Unsurprisingly, the highest equity and EV flops for the BB are also the highest frequency
donk bet boards. However, it is important to understand that the high donk betting frequencies
are an effect and not a cause. As we will see in this section, the main cause of the BB having
higher equity and EV on some flops is the way the ranges are distributed which in turn results in
higher donk betting frequencies.
High Donk Bet Frequency Flops (50%+)
There are about 34 distinct flops that result in an average donk bet over 50% of the time against
both the BN and UTG. They are in ranks 7-x-x and 6-x-x with one to three possible flopped
straights. The higher the number of flopped straights, the smaller the donk bet-size and the
higher the donk bet frequency used. Rainbow flops are donked at a higher frequency than two-
tone flops and, in general, monotone flops get donked a lot less frequently.
                          Table 103: High Donk Bet Frequency Flops

   On the high donk frequency flops, the BB has an average of 50% equity and is able to over-
realize that equity (103% EQR), capturing an average of 52% of the pot (Table 103). The main
reason why the BB over-realizes equity is the way the equity is distributed (Diagram 26).




                     Diagram 26: EQB on High Donk Bet Frequency Flops

   Here, the BB’s range is more polarized than IP’s range. The BB has the advantage in both
strong and good hands, while 50% of IP’s range are weak hands that will have a more difficult
time realizing equity and will therefore benefit from playing passively. This range construction
resembles the Clairvoyance Toy game, with the IP having the more depolarized range, which
makes the BB want to take the betting lead.
                                          Diagram 27

  With stack depths between 30-40bb, the BB wants to bet strong hands 73% of the time, good
hands 64%, weak hands 59%, and trash hands are bet 49%. The most used donk bet-size is 1/4-
pot, with 2/3-pot size bets used on average 5% (Diagram 27). If we allow bigger bet-sizes in the
simulations, the BB will even choose to overbet the pot with a small frequency, but the overall
range composition on this type of high donk bet board seems to favor the small donk bet
(Diagram 28).
                                          Diagram 28

   With a 20bb effective stack, the 2/3-pot size donk bet is preferred. It seems that at 20bb, the
BB’s SPR is small enough that the BB is happy to stack off with a lot of good equity hands on
the flop, so the bigger bet-size protects the BB’s equity by getting more folds and helps the BB
realize equity by getting all the money in on the flop when their equity is high. The BB’s
strongest hands seem to prefer the smaller bet-size because they aren’t as vulnerable, so they
don’t mind getting called more frequently.
   When stacks are deeper, there aren’t many hands that are happy to get all-in on the flop so,
instead, a smaller donk bet-size allows the BB to call a re-raise and see the turn without having
to get all the money in on the flop.
   Strong and good hands are also an important part of the checking ranges. The more checking
happens, the more important it becomes to have strong and good hands in the checking range so
the range remains balanced and protected.
   Donk betting also happens on average more often vs UTG (67% of the time) than vs the BN
(53% of the time). This is because the high donk betting boards are missed a lot more often by
UTG ranges.

Donk Betting Range Example
BB vs UTG on 654r (30bb effective stacks)


Strong hands are bet 77% of the time


  ♦ Straights are the strongest hands the BB can have on this flop. The lowest straight 32 is
    the most vulnerable and it unblocks IP’s continuing range, so it gets bet 91%, while the
    other straights 87 get bet 80% and 73 only gets bet 50%.

  ♦ Sets. Top set gets bet at a very high frequency (94%). The smaller sets are bet very
    infrequently (16-31%), because they don’t block top pair.

  ♦ Two Pairs are bet at a very high frequency. 54 is bet with the highest frequency (96%),
    followed by 64 (94%) and 65 bets the lowest frequency (73%) because it blocks more of
    IP’s continuing range and is also the least vulnerable.


Good hands are bet 70% of the time


  ♦ Overpairs. The strongest overpairs TT and 99 are bet 100% of the time, mid pairs 88 and
    77 are bet 38% of the time.

  ♦ Top Pairs are bet 78% of the time. The ones with the highest kickers and the ones that
    have an OESD betting the highest frequency. The middle kickers are checked more
    frequently.

  ♦ Second Pairs are bet 71% of the time. The ones with the highest kickers and the ones that
    have an OESD betting the highest frequency. The middle kickers are checked more
    frequently.

  ♦ Third Pairs are bet 65% of the time. The ones with the highest kickers and the ones that
    have an OESD betting the highest frequency. The middle kickers are checked more
    frequently.

  ♦ Under Pairs 22-33 are bet 78%. 22 is bet more often than 33.


Weak hands are bet 61% of the time
  ♦ OESD are bet 67% of the time. 7x hands are bet more often than 3x.

  ♦ Ace High is bet 67% of the time in a reverse linear fashion. The weakest A-high being bet
    more often than the strongest ones. For example, A9s is bet 99% of the time and AQs is
    only bet 40%.

  ♦ King High is bet 54% of the time in a reverse linear fashion.

  ♦ Gutshots are bet 70% of the time. The ones that have two overcards being bet more often
    than ones with a single overcard.


Trash hands are bet 62% of the time


  ♦ Air, no pair, no draw, two completely disconnected overcards and gutshots with a 2 and
    no pair and combos with back door flush draw are bet more often than combos with no
    BDFD.


Mid Donk Bet Frequency Flops (25%-50%)
There are about 100 Flops that get donk bet 25-50% of the time. The main examples of flops that
can generally be donk bet 25-50% of the time are: unpaired subfamilies 8MM, 8ML, 8LL, 7ML,
7LL, 6LL, and 5LL with one to three possible flopped straights. The only monotone flop is 764,
and the paired flops are 766, 755, 655 (Diagram 29).
                                        Diagram 29

   Donk betting happens with the same frequency against UTG and the BN, roughly 35% of the
time and checking happens 65% of the time, as the equity distribution doesn’t change too much
in either case.
                                          Diagram 30

   On the mid donk bet flops, equities run very close. IP has a slight equity advantage, 52%
compared to the BB’s 48%. However, the BB’s range is more polarized with the bulk of the
range being strong, good and trash hands, while IP still has a lot of weak hands that benefit from
playing passively and seeing free cards in order to realize equity (Diagram 30).




                                          Diagram 31

   With 30-40bb, strong hands prefer using the bigger bet-size on paired boards and a smaller
size on unpaired boards. Hands are bet linearly according to their equity with the highest equity
hands being bet more often than low equity hands. The structure of the betting ranges is similar
to what we saw previously in the High Donk Bet frequency flops, betting the same type of hands,
but doing so with a lower frequency, checking everything more often so the checking range is
more protected (Diagram 31).
                                         Diagram 32

  With 20bbs, the donking strategy is extremely polarized, betting mostly strong, good and trash
hands. For this reason, a bigger bet-size is preferred, with the smaller size being used in the
opposite way, mostly with weak hands, but also with some frequency of strong, good and trash
hands in order to make the strategy well balanced (Diagram 32).


Low Donk Bet Frequency Flops (10%-25%)
Approximately 181 distinct flops get donk bet with 10% to 25% frequency. In this situation the
67%-pot size bet is preferred (9%) over the 25%-pot size bet (7%). The BB donks slightly more
frequently against the BN (16%) than against UTG (14%).
   The unpaired donked flops subfamilies are: ALL, 9MM, 8MM, 8ML, 8LL, 7ML, 7LL, 6LL,
5LL, and 4LL.
   The paired families are: 99A, 88A, 77H, 77M, 77L, 66A, 66H, 66M, 66L, 55A, 55H, 55M,
55L, 44H, 44M, 44L, 33M (Diagram 33).
                                       Diagram 33




                                       Diagram 34

  In low donk bet frequency flops, IP’s range dominance is clear (Diagram 34). OOP’s equity
drops to 45% and under-realizes by 6%, capturing only 43% of the pot. The number of OOP
trash hands finally outweighs the number of weak hands. OOP’s strong and good hand
percentage is significantly lower than IP. For this reason, checking starts to become the dominant
strategy.
   On low frequency donk bet flops, the donk betting ranges are a little more polarized and, for
this reason, a larger bet-size is preferred. Donk betting does not seem to be too affected by stack
depth and so the frequencies are similar with 20bb, 30bb and 40bb effective stacks (Diagrams
35-36).




                                           Diagram 35
                                           Diagram 36


No Donk Bet Flops (0%-10%)
The vast majority of flops belong to this category. Pretty much all flops that were not included in
any of the other groups. In general, this means trips, monotone, high card paired, disconnected
two-tone, HXX and AXX flops are bad donk betting flops.
  In general, this group of flops are bad for the BB, providing an average of 39% equity and low
EQR of 76%, for an average EV of 30% of the pot. On these boards, IP’s range is so strong that
OOP is forced to check with a high frequency, for an average donk bet frequency of about 1%.
OOP’s range is so weak that it doesn’t have enough strong hands compared to IP to be able to
split this range so, for the most part, removing the option to donk bet on these kinds of flops does
not reduce BB’s EV too significantly. Playing a 100% checking frequency is recommended.
                                           Diagram 37

     Flop families that have similar structures and textures tend to be played in a similar
  fashion. So if you want to dig deeper into donk betting range composition, I recommend
  running sample flops from each donk bet frequency group in a GTO solver to familiarize
  yourself with the different spots, how to react to flop raises and how to follow through on
  future streets.



The Value of Donk Betting
The general consensus states that donk betting is bad and should not be done. However, as we
have just seen, donk betting is widely used by the solver on some flop textures. Given that donk
bets are rarely used, how big of a mistake is it to opt for a simpler strategy that always checks to
the pre-flop aggressor when OOP in a SRP?
   In Table 104 we can see the key flop metrics of BB vs BN with a 30bb effective stack on the
654r flop. The GTO strategy is compared to a simulation where the BB’s donk betting option is
removed to make the BB check 100% of their range.
                             Table 104: 654r BB vs BN 30bbs Stats

   654r is one of the highest donk bet flops. When the BB loses the ability to lead out on this
board, they lose 1.1% of the pot or 6.5bb/100 and the EQR decreases by 2.25%. In a 5.6bb pot,
playing a 100% donk bet strategy cost the BB 6.27bb/100 when playing against a minimally
exploitative opponent.
   The value of donk betting will change depending on the SPR and what the value of the option
for the OOP player to bet is. For example, on the A76r flop, OOP should donk bet about 0.4% of
the time and, if we remove the BB’s option to donk bet, their overall EV remains the same.
   Donk betting only happens at a high frequency on a small number of flops that are also low
frequency flops, so the impact of the EV loss of choosing a simpler strategy that always checks
when OOP will not be significant in the grand scheme of things. Additionally, implementing
donk betting strategies correctly can be difficult in-game. That said, if you play in really tough
games where every possible edge counts, taking the time to study and incorporate donk bets can
become a valuable tool, particularly if your opponents are not used to dealing with flop donk
bets, which can result in them making more mistakes that you could potentially capitalize on.
   You can of course also choose to donk bet exploitatively against weaker players. For example,
if you know that the Villain will c-bet at a high frequency but would never raise a donk bet
without a strong hand, you can put in a small bet with some hands that will work as a blocking
bet, allowing you to see the next card cheaply with some weak hands while giving you
information on your opponent’s holding.
   Another example is if you know the Villain is overly aggressive and will almost always raise a
flop donk bet. Then, you can lead out with very strong hands to induce a raise from the Villain.
This would of course leave you exposed to counter exploitation, so it requires excellent
knowledge about your opponent’s tendencies.



The Power of Position
In this section, we will use the high and low donk bet frequency flops 654r and A76r in BB vs
BN situations with 30bb effective stacks. We will compare the GTO simulations against
modified hypothetical simulations that will help us better understand the effect of being IP and
OOP post-flop.


GTO: Modified GTO Solution with new flop bet-sizings for both players: 1.25-pot, 2/3-pot, 1/4-
pot.


Positions Flipped: Modified solution where the players’ ranges are flipped, so now OOP has the
BN range and the IP Player has the BB range.




             Table 105: Result of Flipping BN and BB Ranges from BN Perspective

   Hero is on the BN and opens a standard GTO 49% opening range and the action folds to the
Villain in the BB who calls with a standard 64% GTO range. Now imagine the positions are
flipped on the flop, but both players keep their original ranges. Now Hero is OOP with a 49%
BN range, and the Villain is IP with a 64% BB calling range (Table 105).
   Let’s start by analyzing what happens to Hero after flipping the positions.
   On A76r, Hero’s range is so strong compared to the Villain’s that Hero still over-realizes
equity, but not as much as with position. Hero’s EV reduces from capturing 75% to only being
able to capture 68.3% of the pot, costing Hero 6.7% of the pot. Hero’s strategy also changes. It is
still optimum to bet 100%, but now the 125% and 1/4-pot bet-sizes are used more than the 2/3-
pot sizing.
   When playing IP, Hero’s strategy is almost always aimed to bet across three streets. For this
reason, the 67% size is used more often as it allows an effective triple barrel. When we flip the
positions, some elements of Hero’s range only want to play a two street game. Therefore, after
overbetting the flop and getting called, Hero will mostly go all-in or check on the turn. After
checking and facing a bet, Hero will mostly x/r all-in or fold. This way, Hero reduces the
positional disadvantage.
  On 654r, Hero has a range disadvantage so, unlike on A76r, betting the entire range isn’t
advisable because the risk of the check-raise (which would destroy Hero’s equity) increases
drastically. So, with position, Hero can only bet about 48% of the time after the BB checks.
When Hero is OOP with the BN’s range on this flop, the total betting frequency drops down to
9.23% and the most used bet-size is the 125% overbet. Again, Hero aims to play a two street
game and go all-in on the turn with a reasonably high frequency.
   Weak hands make up 51% of Hero’s range. When in position these would be checked back
most of the time to realize equity and would prefer to play a small pot, so as not to risk being x/r
and blown off their equity. Unfortunately, when checking OOP, Hero is not guaranteed to see a
turn card and will instead often face a bet and be forced to give up equity with many hands that
would benefit from seeing a free turn card. For this reason, when OOP, Hero has to check many
strong hands that can x/r the flop, forcing the Villain to bet less often, and thus allowing Hero’s
weak hands to realize equity. If Hero does not protect the checking range, Villain will bet at a
higher frequency, costing Hero a lot of EV. For this reason, Hero’s checking frequency is even
higher when OOP with a range disadvantage. When OOP on 654r, Hero’s EQR decreases from
100% to 79%, costing 9.7% of the pot!
   Next, we will analyze the same situation from the Villain’s point of view, with the BB now
being in position, and compare it to the GTO simulations. In the flipped simulations we will
assume OOP checks 100% of the time to IP, so the ranges are the exact same as when the BB
was OOP (Table 106).




             Table 106: Result of Flipping BN and BB Ranges from BB Perspective

   On A76r the Villain’s range is so weak compared to Hero’s range that, even when having
position, it is best to check back 100% of the time as betting would result in being x/r at a very
high frequency. The main difference is that, after checking back the flop, the Villain gets to
realize a lot more equity than when OOP and gets forced to fold a lot of weak and trash hands
that will improve to made hands or draws on the turn. This results in a huge EV increase from
25% when OOP to 37.8% when IP for a total gain of 12.8%!
  On 654r pretty much all hands that wanted to bet when OOP still want to bet when the Villain
is IP. The main difference is that now the larger bet-sizes aren’t as necessary and the Villain opts
to use the 25% bet-size almost exclusively. In this case the BB increases their EV by capturing
an extra 10% of the pot.


Symmetric Ranges: Modified solution where both players have the exact same range. We will
examine one example with both players having the BB range and another with both players
having the BN range (Tables 107-108).




                        Table 107: Symmetric Ranges from IP Perspective




                      Table 108: Symmetric Ranges from OOP Perspective

  Despite having identical ranges, the IP player captures on average 5% more of the pot than
50% equity, for a total EQR of 110%. Meanwhile OOP only realizes 90% of their equity,
capturing on average only 45% of the pot.

    Different experiments that use different sample flops, or even a large subset of flops, give
  results that are consistent with the value of position being between 5-10% of the pot.

   The more streets left to play, the bigger IP’s information advantage becomes as IP gets to act
last on each street. As mentioned previously, every action taken at the table conveys information,
so every time OOP takes an action, this reveals some information about their range to IP, who
can use this information to his advantage before having to make a decision. This continues to the
river, where IP will have the most complete information possible regarding OOP’s range.
Furthermore, when studying complex strategies in Chapter 4, we established that there is a direct
correlation between stack depth or SPR and Hero’s ability to realize equity. Deeper stacks
benefit the IP Player and hurt the OOP player. For this reason, OOP tends to use larger bet-
sizings than IP, either to get more folds and end the hand immediately or, if called, to decrease
the positional disadvantage by reducing the SPR.
   Another measure OOP takes to decrease positional disadvantage is to avoid splitting their
range on flops where they have a large range disadvantage and thus not give away any
information to IP by checking 100% of the time, as seen in the donk betting section of this
chapter.
   Being IP with a weak range is not as bad as being OOP with a weak range. In general, strong
ranges will realize most of their equity and sometimes even over-realize it when OOP, while
weak ranges heavily under-realize their equity when OOP. For this reason, over-folding the big
blind to steals was a predominant strategy in both live and online poker for many years as
players generally tried to avoid this unfavorable situation. This in turn created an opportunity for
observant players to capitalize on this by loosening up their opening ranges and attacking the
tight players’ big blinds. Subsequently, players started to readjust their BB strategy and began
calling very wide vs open raises, which resulted in the BB defending way too many marginal
hands that made post-flop play too difficult for the BB, hurting their overall EQR.
   Now, with modern solvers, both pre- and post-flop play have in general improved drastically,
resulting in players defending in a close to optimal fashion from the BB. This is particularly true
in high stakes online cash games where most regulars play a sound baseline pre-flop GTO
strategy and are now forced to look for possible edges elsewhere. However, even at the highest
level, players still make mistakes. The game is not completely solved and there is always room
for improvement and exploitation.

    The goal with this chapter is to improve the players’ underlying understanding of the
  game so that they are capable of finding these edges by themselves and to turn them into
  winning strategies applicable to their own games.




12
THE FLOP
CONTINUATION-BET (C-BET)
Flop c-betting is one of the most important topics in poker. It is a complex subject that has been
studied and discussed by poker players and theorists for decades. Contrary to most typical theory
books, I decided to begin the flop discussion with the BB instead of leaping directly into c-
betting. This is because I want readers to first develop a good conceptual understanding of
betting in general, how the post-flop action is a function of the players’ relative positions, range
distributions and SPR. After studying OOP betting and the power of position, all that is left in
order to understand the flop c-bet is to analyze the situation from the IP player’s point of view.
   Just as we did when studying the donk bet, for this section we will use the aggregated data
from thousands of GTO solutions with stack depths 20bb, 30bb and 40bb with standard GTO
MTT starting ranges. The ranges in your own games might be different to the ones used for these
simulations, but I have found that, as long as the ranges used are “reasonable”, the overall results
for post-flop play won’t be significantly affected. If the standard ranges in your own games differ
too much from the equilibrium strategies, you can still benefit by understanding equilibrium and
then applying the principles discussed in this chapter to understand how your standard ranges are
different from GTO and how you can deviate from equilibrium to further attack the imbalances
introduced in the new strategies. Getting your own solver and running some custom simulations
can help you better understand this effect and find good exploitative lines against population
tendencies.
   In the previous section we found that, from a GTO point of view, there isn’t too much
incentive for OOP to bet out on the flop, but what about IP? What is their equilibrium strategy?
Are they incentivized to bet or check? Can they play a pure strategy that always checks back the
flop without a significant EV loss in the way the BB can?




                        Table 109: Result of IP Playing 100% Check Back
  If IP plays a strategy that always checks back the flop, they will have an EV loss of 26bb/100,
so c-betting the flop is of massive importance to IP. In this section, we will study the principles
behind the flop c-bet and use that knowledge to effectively develop sound c-betting strategies.



Overall Flop Metrics
This analysis starts on IP’s decision point after the BB checks. For these calculations, we used
simulations where the BB had the option to donk bet. However, donk betting happens very
infrequently and, in general, checking GTO ranges will remain well balanced even when donk
betting is widely used. Therefore, we can expect IP’s overall strategy to not be affected and be
applicable to players who have a GTO donking range and players who check 100% of the time.
   Players who have a non-GTO donking range are in general quite exploitable as their donking
range tends to be always strong or always weak, so all you need to do against them is figure out
their strategy. If they always donk strong, you can start to overfold the bottom of your range
when they bet and bet at a high frequency when they check. If they donk weak, you can bluff
raise them on the flop, trap them with your really strong hands that don’t need much protection,
and check back the flop a little more than usual to avoid being x/r by a checking range that is
heavily skewed towards strong hands.




                              Table 110: IP vs BB Overall Metrics

  Both the BN and UTG over-realize their equity by 15%, but since UTG’s range has higher
equity, they are able to capture a bigger portion of the pot than the BN (Table 110).
                            Diagram 38: BB vs IP Equity Buckets

   Clearly IP has the overall range advantage. As expected, UTG’s ~15% range is much stronger
than the BN’s ~44% range (Diagram 38). This aligns well with UTG’s higher c-bet frequency.
                                           Diagram 39


Strong hands
Strong hands are incentivized to bet and increase the size of the pot but, as we know, betting only
your high-equity hands and checking your low-equity hands would be a highly exploitable
strategy. For this reason, IP also has to bet some weaker hands on the flop so that the c-betting
range remains balanced.
   Sometimes checking back strong hands works well in situations when they don’t need as much
protection. When they block the Villain’s continuing range, or when they are so nutted that it
doesn’t matter if you give a free card so the Villain can catch a small piece or start bluffing,
checking behind with some of your strong hands makes sense. This is referred to as trapping. An
added benefit is that checking strong hands also helps protect your checking range.


Good hands
Good hands also benefit by betting and gaining value from worse hands as well as for protection
to get some folds from hands that have equity. However, sometimes it makes sense to check back
your good hands when the BB’s range is very polarized to hands that are either stronger than
yours or have very little equity. By checking behind, you give the Villain a chance to pick up
some equity with trash hands or start bluffing with them, while keeping the pot size under
control when you are beat. This action is often referred to as pot controlling.


Weak hands
Weak hands benefit from checking back when the Villain’s range is strong and you risk getting
x/r and pushed off your hand. However, they do well as semi-bluffs when your opponent’s range
is generally weak and cannot x/r you at a high frequency.


Trash hands
Trash hands will not improve too often when checked back, so they are in general c-bet more
often than weak hands. They mostly benefit from having fold equity. If called, they will still
have some equity in the pot, but their equity is sufficiently low that you don’t mind having to
bet/fold them vs a x/r. Betting your trash is often referred to as a pure bluff.




                                         Diagram 40

   UTG’s c-bet frequency and bet-sizes are bigger than the BN because the UTG range is
stronger than that of the BN. In general, the more strong hands your range has compared to your
opponent’s, the more frequently you can bet. This is because the more strong hands your betting
range has, the more you can bet other hands in your range because your range is protected. The
fact that UTG’s range is in general stronger than the BN’s also allows the use the bigger bet-
sizes more frequently (Diagram 41).




                                          Diagram 41

   The bigger sizes are generally used less often when stacks are shallower, and the use of bigger
bets (and even overbets) becomes more relevant when stacks are deeper. This makes sense
because, in general, when stacks are shallow, big bets aren’t needed to get all the money in
across two or three streets. There is no need to overcommit large portions of your stack when the
SPR is low. The only exception is the all-in bet, which gets used more often when stacks get
shallow, because the risk/reward ratio is much better when all your chips are going in and you
are guaranteed to realize your equity (Diagram 41).
                                          Diagram 42

  Since the BB has more offsuit connectors than IP, flops with more possible flopped straights
will, as expected, favor the BB. So, the c-bet frequency decreases as there are more straights
possible on the flop. Flops with zero flopped straights are the highest c-bet ones.
   Within the flops with zero possible straights, we can create a subcategory for the number of
possible open-ended straight draws (Diagram 42).
   Not surprisingly, the flops with three OESDs are the ones with the lowest c-bet frequency and
with the larger bet-sizes, as the BB will have more possible straight draws and IP’s strong hands
need more protection (Diagram 43).
   The only 2xx flop is 222 and it is c-bet 100% of the time. Axx flops are the second most c-bet
flops, with a 96% c-bet frequency. 3xx flops are only 333, 322 or 332 and are c-bet 93% of the
time. Kxx flops are c-bet 88%, Qxx and Txx are c-bet 85% and, as expected, middle and low
flops are c-bet at the lowest frequencies, with 6xx being the lowest at only 62% (Diagram 44).
Diagram 43




Diagram 44
                                           Diagram 45


Diagram 45 shows how often IP should bet in terms of the flop texture. Clearly, paired boards
should be frequently min-bet. This will be examined in greater detail in the forthcoming sections.


Flop C-betting by Structure
The flop structure is one of the key characteristics that drives post-flop play as the strategies
differ drastically if the flops feature trips, are paired, or are unpaired.
   Trips are by far the absolute best flops for IP, who can capture on average 81% of the pot on
this texture. Paired boards, on the other hand, give the BB a lot of strong hands, polarizing their
range and allowing them some counterplay. This range polarization is one of the main reasons
why betting very small is optimal on paired boards. Small bets force the BB to reveal a lot of
information about their holding, as there are a lot of trash and weak hands the BB has to fold,
regardless of IP’s bet-size, and IP loses the minimum when having to bet/fold the flop with the
bottom of their range.
   In general, small bets are preferred when IP’s range has this type of depolarized distribution
with the bulk of hands being good, but not great, and a low frequency of trash and weak hands.
In situations where IP’s range distribution is more polarized with a bigger proportion of strong,
weak and trash hands, bigger bet-sizes are used more often.
             Diagram 46




Table 111: IP Metrics by Flop Structure




             Diagram 47
                                           Diagram 48

   On flops featuring trips, there is a clear pattern of bigger bet-sizes being used more often on
the lower ranks, while 1/3-pot is the most frequently seen bet-size.
   On paired flops, min-betting is clearly the preferred bet-size for most flop ranks, although 1/3-
pot is preferred on flop families AAM, AAL and LLL, 1/2-pot is seldom used, while 2/3-pot is
never used. The most checked families are MMH, HHA, LLM, LLH, LLL, MMM, MML and
LLA. As expected, flops with the paired card being of low or middle rank tend to benefit the BB
more than IP, and so they get checked more often than flops that contain a paired high card or an
ace.
Diagram 49




Diagram 50
   On unpaired flops, the least c-bet flop families are LLL, MMM, MML, MLL and HMM. We
still see a lot of bet-size mixing, so we have to look deeper into the unpaired flop textures to get a
better idea of how to approach them.


Flop C-betting by Texture (Unpaired Flops)
Unpaired flops make 82.82% of all flops. In this section, we will look into the different textures
of unpaired flops and how they affect the players’ range distributions and flop strategies.
                                          Diagram 51




                             Table 112: IP Metrics by Flop Texture




                                          Diagram 52

   Monotone flops are the most c-bet but they also have the lowest EV for IP. On this texture,
IP’s strong hand percentage diminishes by a large margin, while the BB’s strong hand
percentage increases because a lot of hands that would be trash on other textures are now flushes
and a lot of IP’s hands that would be strong on other textures reduce in equity. The BB’s weak
hands percentage also increases, as many hands that would be complete trash on other textures
now have some sort of flush draw. This range distribution creates a similar situation as on paired
boards, with the BB having a polarized distribution, while IP is more depolarized. For this
reason, using smaller bet-sizes is preferred as they will get a lot of folds from the BB’s hands
that have terrible equity while not overcommitting with all of IP’s good, but not great hands.
   I often see players making the mistake of betting large on monotone flops, thinking that they
need to protect their good hands and make the BB fold. The problem with that is that if your bet-
size is too large, you force the BB to fold the weak hands that would continue against a smaller
bet and will be isolating yourself against the top of their range that will either have you beat or
have a ton of equity.




                                           Diagram 53
                                          Diagram 54

   The lower the ranks and the more connected the board, the less IP gets to c-bet, with MMM,
LLL, MML, and HMM being the least c-bet flops. Flops with three possible flopped straights are
checked 31% of the time, flops with two straights are checked 28%, flops with one straight are
checked 17% and flops with zero straights are checked only 10% of the time. Stack depth also
has an effect, with deeper stacks being more likely to check the flop.
   We could easily simplify our strategy on monotone flops to use only 1/3-pot bet-sizes or min-
bets without suffering a significant EV loss.
   Again, we see the trend of lower ranks being c-bet less frequently. However, we see a big
difference in the way bet-sizes are used compared to monotone flops, with bigger bet-sizes being
used a lot more frequently. Again, this is a function of the way the equities are distributed on
two-tone flops, with IP having 24% strong hands compared to the BB’s 5%.
                                            Diagram 55

  On rainbow flops, IP’s range advantage is even greater than on two-tone flops, which will
again result in an even higher preference for larger bet-sizes. Hands that are strong on rainbow
flops usually also tend to be strong on the turn and river. Conversely, on two-tone flops, the
presence of possible flush draws will result in more abrupt equity shifts. The absence of flush
draws on the flop also increases the percentage of the BB’s trash hands that would have a flush
draw on a two-tone board. For these reasons, IP will be able to triple barrel more effectively on
rainbow flops and get all the money in by the river.



Developing IP C-betting Strategies
The first thing you should consider when deciding to c-bet is your opponent’s skill level. If the
Villain is a weak player who is completely oblivious, you can get away with doing pretty much
anything you want. If you think they are likely to call your overbets across three streets very
light, then you should by all means take them to value town any time you have a hand that is
ahead of their calling range.
   On the other hand, if you have a hand that has very little equity and bad blockers, you should
either give up or bet small, trying to take down the pot right there, and be ready to give up if your
first bet is called because this type of player will simply not fold, regardless of the bet-size you
choose. As with this example, there are many different situations where you should tweak your
bet-size and frequencies in order to manipulate your opponent’s range. The problem with making
these adjustments occurs when your opponent is smart, aware and capable of counter-
exploitation. Then, you need to have a solid strategy so you don’t get exploited instead.
   If the Villain is a good player, or at least you think that they will likely defend well on the
particular flop with the ranges in play, then there are two main concepts to consider:


  ♦ The flop GTO c-betting frequency

  ♦ The c-bet-size

   In this section, we focus on these two key factors and try to use them to develop our intuition
so we can more effectively develop our own c-betting strategies.
   All the simulations that were used to develop the data in this section had the familiar flop bet-
sizes: min-bets, 1/3-pot, 1/2-pot and 2/3-pot. We can categorize flop bet-sizes into two groups
according to the c-bet size that is preferred by the solver:


  ♦ Big bet-size: 1/2-pot, 2/3-pot

  ♦ Small bet-size: min-bet, 1/3-pot

  We can also categorize flops according to c-bet frequency as follows:


  ♦ High c-bet frequency flops (80%+)

  ♦ Mid c-bet frequency flops (60%-80%)

  ♦ Low c-bet frequency flops (less than 60%)

   In poker, it is rarely the case that something is true 100% of the time, and the equity buckets
system is no exception. Still, we can use the EQB diagrams to get a good idea of how the
players’ equity distributions affect post-flop play by studying the EQB in the previously used
flop categories.
                   Diagram 56: Big Bet-size: Average Flop Equity Buckets

   In general, when a big bet-size is used by IP, the BB has the most depolarized range with
about 4-5% strong hands and a higher number of good hands, 19-36%. When a small bet-size is
used, the BB has 7-9% strong hands (twice as many strong hands) and a lower number of good
hands, 20-27%. So, IP sizes up when OOP has many hands that can potentially call the flop, and
sizes down when OOP potentially has more raising hands.
                    Diagram 57: Small Bet-size: Average Flop Equity Buckets

   Another interesting trend is how IP’s c-betting frequency increases as more trash hands are in
the BB’s range and decreases as the IP’s range becomes more depolarized. When the number of
strong hands in their range decreases, the number of good and weak hands in their range
increases.
   In practice, on 80%+ c-bet flops, you can get away with c-betting 100% of the time with little
to no EV loss, even against a minimally exploitative opponent. Due to IP’s massive range
advantage, there is little the Villain can do to attack the flop c-bets.
   On mid frequency c-bet flops, IP’s range still dominates the BB, but the ranges are now much
closer, as IP’s range becomes more depolarized by having fewer strong hands and more weak
hands than on high c-bet flops, while the BB’s range gets stronger. Because of this shift in the
range composition, IP cannot get away with c-betting at a high frequency without it costing EV,
even against weak players, as their ranges hit these flops too well, making it easy for them to
defend against flop bets. Instead of betting a merged range, IP splits their range, checking back
good, but not great hands that benefit from keeping the pot small and seeing a free turn card at a
high frequency, while c-betting a more polarized range, which results in bigger bet-sizes
becoming more dominant.
   Playing turns after checking back the flop can be challenging and, for this reason, I frequently
hear players come up with excuses to bet hands they should be checking back on the flop so they
don’t have to deal with playing difficult turns. One of the most typical arguments is that the bet
is a so-called “information bet”. Some players are eager to make a flop bet with a weak hand that
would benefit from checking back and playing a small pot, only to get raised off the pot in
situations where the BB is likely to x/r the flop. Or, even worse, they will call the flop x/r only to
fold on a turn bet 100% of the time when they fail to improve. This is a massive mistake that
amateurs and even many pros make on a regular basis simply because they want to avoid losing
the “betting lead”. They are happy to put more money into the pot just to fold to aggression so
they can feel good about themselves for making a “good fold”.

    Playing poker is easier when you have the stronger range and you are the one making
  bets, putting your opponents to the test, but that cannot be an excuse for making -EV plays
  by overplaying your hands.

    Poker is not about trying to win every single hand you play by force, but instead about
  making the highest EV play every time.

  Sometimes the highest EV play is to simply give up.
   Learning how to balance your ranges so you are not an easy target, and being selectively
 aggressive and smart, is what makes the difference between a rookie and a top player.


General IP C-bet Guidelines

 ♦ You don’t need to know the exact range composition combo by combo. All you need to
   make educated decisions is to have a good idea of the composition of each player’s
   equity buckets.

 ♦ If your opponent has a lot of trash in their range, you should c-bet at a high frequency and
    expect to get many folds. If they have very few strong hands compared to you, you
   should size up!

 ♦ High c-bet % and big bet-size flops are the absolute best flops for IP. They allow for
   aggressive play and you should expect to capture most of the pot.

 ♦ Low c-bet % and small bet-size flops are the best flops for the BB. Equities run close and
   you should be cautious, generally betting small and at a low frequency.

 ♦ The types of hands that the solver likes to check back on the flop are generally the same.
   What changes is the frequency they are checked.

 ♦ Bet-folding high equity hands on the flop is a disaster. If your range is not strong enough
   to c-bet 100% without risking being x/r at a high frequency, you should split your range,
   c-betting a more polarized range and checking back good and weak hands that benefit
   from taking a free turn.

 ♦ If you do have a checking range on a given flop, check back strong hands that block your
    opponent’s continuing range, particularly if, on that flop, you are likely to get many folds.

 ♦ If you expect your opponent to fold a lot or raise your bet, you should bet small at a high
    frequency, and if you expect them to call a lot, you should size up.

 ♦ Don’t put yourself in areas of the game tree where you are not comfortable. It is a
   completely different thing to ask yourself how the solver would play a tricky spot and to
   ask what the best play you can think of right now is.

 ♦ It’s better to have a plan, even a simple plan, than have no plan at all.
  ♦ In multi-way pots, blockers are more important than raw hand strength.

  ♦ Generally, play passively in multi-way pots. Don’t bet draws too often unless they are to
    the nuts.

  ♦ Never think about a hand in a vacuum. Always think about the context.

  ♦ Hands with backdoor equity and no showdown value generally work well as semi-bluffs.

  ♦ If you have a checking range, make sure to check back strong hands with some frequency
     so you don’t get easily exploited by aggressive players stabbing at the pot after you
     checked.

  ♦ If you are unsure about the flop strategy with your range, you can default to c-betting 1/3-
     pot in most short and middle stack situations.

  ♦ If you are unsure whether you should bet or check your hand, ask yourself what would
     happen if you are raised. If your hand hates being raised and you are likely to face a x/r,
     then you should probably check.

  ♦ If the BB does not have a donk betting range on good donking flops, you should c-bet less
     often than equilibrium suggests because you will get x/r more often.

  ♦ If your hand can get value across three streets, it is almost always ideal to start by betting
     the flop.

  ♦ Don’t try to get recreational players off top pair. More often than not, they will not fold it.

The Way Ahead or Way Behind Situation

Sometimes IP’s range is so strong compared to the BB’s range that, even if they could profitably
c-bet 100% and get a lot of folds, the strategy involves checking back the flop at a high
frequency. This happens on flops where BB’s range is extremely polarized to strong hands and a
lot of trash with little in between.


Example
Board: A♠T♥T♦
Situation: BB vs UTG
Stack depth: 30bb
IP EQB: 57% strong hands, 37% good, 5% weak and 1% trash
BB EQB: 7% strong, 12% good, 0% weak and 81% trash.

   This situation is commonly known as way ahead or way behind because your opponent will
either have a monster or little to nothing, without much in between. In this set-up, IP wants to
check back the flop with many good hands for pot control, alongside a big chunk of strong hands
as traps. IP also wants to c-bet all trash hands and most weak hands, balanced with the remaining
strong and some good hands. This allows IP to often win the pot uncontested on the flop with
trash while being able to bluff-catch effectively on future streets after checking back the flop.
   When facing a x/r, you should always consider your opponent’s range and your hand vs range
equity. If the Villain is likely to x/r the flop less than equilibrium suggests, they will probably be
missing the optimal bluff. Their range will be heavily skewed towards strong hands and your
overall equity will be a lot lower than you would expect it to be. If that is the case, you can
exploit the Villain by over-folding the flop. Even if they bluff you once in a while, their
frequencies are so far off to the point that it is not worth the risk of continuing with middle
strength hands. Depending on the Villain, you can even lay down some strong hands you would
never consider folding against someone else.
   If Villain’s range is skewed towards draws, then you can 3-bet aggressively with your good
and strong hands that can benefit from protection. If the Villain’s range is polarized to strong
hands or bluffs, your range will play better as a bluff-catcher. Let them keep putting money in
with bluffs and don’t raise back with medium strength hands.


IP C-bet Examples
Flop Strategy Example 1

High c-bet % and big bet-size: BB vs UTG on A♥Q♦3♠ (40bb)
          Diagram 58: High c-bet % and Big Bet-size: BB vs UTG on A♥Q♦3♠ (40bb)

   If we give IP the option to use a 120% overbet, the solver will use it 14.45% of the time,
although this does not generate any extra EV to IP. On the other hand, simplifying the strategy to
c-bet 100% for 1/3-pot bet-size loses 1.07% of the pot, or 6.6bb/100. Simplifying the strategy to
c-bet 100% using the 2/3-pot bet-size retains all of IP’s EV.




                                          Diagram 59
                   Table 113: UTG C-betting Range Breakdown on A♥Q♦3♠

  On A♥Q♦3♠, UTG has all very strong hands, such as AA, QQ and AK, while the BB would 3-
bet AA and QQ all the time and AK most of the time. This lack of nutted hands in the BB’s
range allows IP to bet big across multiple streets, over-realizing the 72% equity and capturing
85% of the pot.


Facing a Min x/r
On this flop, IP has a massive range advantage and, at equilibrium, should only face a flop x/r
about 5% of the time. OOP’s x/r range contains hands such as 33, AQ, A3, Q3, AJ, a few AT-
A7, and bluffs such as gutshots and some bottom pair plus a BDFD and BDSTD.
   UTG’s typical response should be to fold about 30% of their range, including most pocket
pairs, K-high without a gutshot and pure air. UTG’s 3-bet range contains hands such as AK, AJ,
a small frequency of AQ, and about 5% of sets for value, plus some KJo, QJs and QTs without a
BDFD and about half of JJ as bluffs. 52% of UTG’s range calls vs the x/r and plays the turn
including any top pair, middle pair and gutshots.

Flop Strategy Example 2

High c-bet % and small bet-size: BB vs UTG on Q♥J♥T♥ (40bb)
        Diagram 59: High C-bet % and Small Bet-size: BB vs UTG on Q♥J♥T♥ (40bb)




                                        Diagram 60

   On Q♥J♥T♥, UTG has a substantial range advantage, so they would like to c-bet at a high
frequency, but the BB’s range is too polarized, with many hands that would not be able to
continue on the flop if UTG used a big bet-size. At the same time, BB has many strong hands
that will be happy to continue vs a big bet-size. So, by betting big UTG would be making the
BB’s life easier, allowing them to correctly fold weak hands and continue with a very strong
range. If instead, UTG bets the minimum, this will lure the BB in with many weak hands that
UTG dominates, keeping their range wider on future streets.




                    Table 114: UTG c-betting Range Breakdown on Q♥J♥T♥

   The strategy on this flop can be simplified to min-bet 100% with no EV loss. Many times,
when people see all the small frequencies being used, they freak out, thinking that playing with
that level of detail is impossible, and they are right. Only a solver would be capable of that kind
of mixing but, as we saw in the post-flop bet-sizing section, we don’t need to use multiple bet-
sizes, as a single bet-size will retain virtually all the strategy’s EV.


Facing a 50% Pot x/r
The BB x/r range on this flop includes many strong hands such as flushes, straights, sets and two
pair, alongside flush draws and straights draws and not too much pure air.
   UTG’s response to a flop x/r on this texture is to almost never 3-bet, folding about 35% of the
time and calling the remaining 65%. UTG’s continuing range includes pretty much all hands that
are two pair or better, a pair with a straight draw and pretty much any hand that has a flush draw.

Flop Strategy Example 3

Mid c-bet % and big bet-size: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bbs)




           Diagram 61: Mid c-bet % and Big Bet-size: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bbs)
                                          Diagram 62

   On this flop texture, IP has 59% equity and is able to capture 69.04% of the pot. Simplifying
the strategy to a single 2/3-pot bet-size retains most of IP’s EV, 68.95%, for an EV loss of -0.09
or -0.6bb/100.
   A 100% c-bet strategy cannot be implemented on this flop as it would cost UTG an EV loss of
4.25% of the pot, or -24bb/100. At equilibrium, the BB’s x/r frequency vs UTG is about 4%, but
vs the 100% c-bet strategy, the BB can attack UTG by increasing the x/r frequency to a gigantic
48.42%.
                   Table 115: UTG C-betting Range Breakdown on 9♥8♥4♦

  The UTG strategy breaks down as follows:


Strong hands
Strong hands are bet most of the time. Hands such as AA, top set and middle set get checked
back ~8%.


Good hands
Good hands are played passively, with made hands such as middle pairs mostly being checked.
Good draws such as combo draws and flush draws are mostly c-bet, while weaker draws such as
OESD mostly get checked. Top pair wants to check back 24% of the time and can be c-bet in a
reverse linear fashion, with the strongest kicker A9 being c-bet 100% and T9s being c-bet 66%.


Weak hands
The only weak hands in IP’s range that don’t have any sort of draw are K-high and A-high. In
general, combos with a BDFD get c-bet more often than combos without a BDFD.
Trash hands
The only hand with less than 33% equity in IP’s range is 65s, and it gets c-bet ~95% of the time.


Facing a MIN x/r
On this flop, the BB should only x/r about 4% of the time, given a lack of strong hands in their
range. The flop x/r range includes hands such as two pair, overpairs, combo draws and some
overcards with a BDFD.
   UTG’s response at equilibrium is to fold about 32% of the time, including mostly overcards
without a BDFD. UTG 3-bets all-in ~13.5%, and 3-bets a smaller size about 8% of the time. The
3-betting range includes hands such as overpairs, top pair top kicker and the nut flush draw
(particularly with two overcards) and some bluffs with hands such as A♥ plus an overcard. The
rest of the range calls, for a calling frequency of ~47%.

Flop Strategy Example 4

Mid c-bet % and small bet-size: BB vs BN on J♠6♥6♦ (40bbs)




          Diagram 63: Mid C-bet % and Small Bet-size: BB vs BN on J♠6♥6♦ (40bbs)

  On this flop, the BB’s range is very polar and has a healthy number of strong hands at 14%,
not too far away from the BN’s 23%. More specifically, the BB’s range has 8.9% trip sixes,
while the BN only has 5%. For this reason, the BN cannot use a large sizing, but the BB still has
52% trash hands that will struggle to continue against even a min-bet. This allows the BN to
have a high overall c-bet frequency of 72%.
                                     Diagram 64




                 Table 116: BN C-betting Range Breakdown on J♠6♥6♦

The BN strategy breaks down as follows:
Strong hands
Some strong hands such as quads (66) and full houses (JJ) block the BB’s continuing range, so
they benefit from trapping and checking back the flop with some frequency. This gives the
Villain the chance to either start bluffing or catch some equity. Also, IP’s range is protected
when they check back the flop. Overpairs QQ+ like checking back the flop with some frequency
when they block the BB’s BDFDs that would continue on the flop. So, a hand like K♣K♦ is more
likely to c-bet than a hand like K♠K♥.


Good hands
Good hands are pocket pairs TT-22 (except 66) and these are c-bet half the time.


Weak hands
Suited A-high gets c-bet linearly, with the strongest AK-AQs being c-bet 100%, then the
middling ones ATs-A7s being c-bet 80% and the baby A-high A5s-A2s being c-bet only 34%.
The logic is that the stronger A-highs have better equity vs the BB’s x/r range, so IP wants to
have them more often when facing a x/r. Also, they have better blockers to top pair, and get
called by worse A-high more often.


Trash hands
Air gets c-bet 75% of the time.


Facing a 50% Pot x/r
The total BB x/r frequency on this board is about 27%, with a polarized range including some
strong hands such as trips, a few good top pairs and some very weak hands such as BDFD and
BDSTD combos.
   The BN’s equilibrium response to the x/r has them folding about 35% of hands, 3-betting 11%
using a min-raise and calling 54%. The BN’s folding range includes all air, and many weak A-
and K-high with only one overcard to the flopped J. The BN’s 3-betting range is extremely
polarized, including hands such as A6 and K6, some strong top pair, and some bluffs with two
overcards with a BDFD or BDFD and BDSTD. The calling range contains any pair+, most A-
and K- and Q-high and hands with backdoor equity.

Flop Strategy Example 5

Low c-bet % and big bet-size: BB vs BN on 8♥6♦2♠ (40bbs)
           Diagram 65: Low c-bet % and Big Bet-size: BB vs BN on 8♥6♦2♠ (40bbs)




                                          Diagram 66

  On 862r, the BB has few strong hands compared to the BN. This incentivizes the BN to use a
big bet-size. However, the BN also has many good and weak hands that benefit from playing a
small pot and taking a free turn card. These range distributions results in a more polarized big
bet-size with a low c-bet frequency.
                      Table 117: BN C-betting Range Breakdown on 8♥6♦2♠

  The IP player strategy breaks down as follows:


Strong hands
It is important for IP to have some strong hands that can continue on brick runouts. For this
reason, some strong hands such as top set and top pair weak kicker get checked back with some
frequency. In fact, top set wants to check back or bet small. Since I advocate one bet-size by
flop, I think a good strategy would be to simply always check back top set in this spot. A trend
that typically loses a lot of EV to IP that I see all the time is to c-bet all strong and good hands on
the flop and checking back an unbalanced and capped range that can be attacked by the BB on
future streets.


Good hands
Good hands really want to check back a lot and realize equity instead of being raised off the pot.
Middle and low pocket pairs mostly want to check back the flop, except 77, which can be bet
half the time, as it can get value from middle pair. The strongest middle pairs such as A6 and K6
are mostly c-bet and the weaker ones are typically checked back. Bottom pair top kicker is
mostly c-bet, and the rest are checked back. Ace-highs without a BDFD are c-bet reverse linearly
(A6o is c-bet more often than AQo) except AKo, which is mostly bet and the ones with a BDFD
are c-bet linearly (AKs is c-bet more often than A3s).


Weak hands
Weak hands are c-bet reverse linearly when they cannot call a flop x/r. For example, K6o gets c-
bet more often than K9o, which also gets c-bet more often than KQo. So, the strongest Kx that
will do well on many turns can be checked back, while the weaker ones better serve as bet/folds.
OESDs are mostly checked back, while gutshots and Q-high with two overcards are mostly c-
bet.


Trash hands
Weak Q-high, J-high and T-high with no draws are c-bet more often than not, but you have to
give up and check back some of them because c-betting all your trash would make your c-betting
range too weak.


Facing a 50% Pot x/r
On 862r, the BB’s range does not have many strong hands, thus the equilibrium flop x/r
frequency is low, at ~8%. The x/r range mostly includes hands such as top pair good kicker,
some OESD, some weak hands like gutshot plus BDFD and some random overcards.
   The BN’s equilibrium response is to fold 43% of the time, call 34% and 3-bet all-in 23%. The
BN’s 3-betting range includes hands such as QQ-99, top pair good kicker+, and some random
two overcards with a BDFD such as KTs, Q9s, J9s and T9s. The calling range is pretty much any
pair, any gutshot or better draw and most overcards with a BDFD. Air and overcards with no
BDFD are always folded.

Flop Strategy Example 6

Low c-bet % and small bet-size: BB vs BN on 5♥5♦4♥ (40bbs)
          Diagram 67: Low c-bet % and Small Bet-size: BB vs BN on 5♥5♦4♥ (40bbs)




                                          Diagram 68

   On this flop, the BN doesn’t have a significant range advantage, hence the preference for the
smaller bet-sizes. In fact, most of the BN range is made of good hands, giving a depolarized
distribution that will result in a low c-bet frequency, as many good and weak hands in the BN’s
range will benefit from checking back the flop.
                   Table 118: UTG C-betting Range Breakdown on 5♥5♦4♥

  The IP player strategy breaks down as follows:


Strong hands
Strong hands are slowplayed ~28% of the time. Quads are mostly checked back, full houses are
checked back about 22% of the time, trips are almost always c-bet and overpairs get c-bet in a
reverse linear fashion. TT gets c-bet 76%, JJ 64%, QQ 50%, KK 40% and AA 22%, as the
bigger pairs need less protection and make great hands to call down on many runouts after
checking back the flop. A-high combo draws get c-bet ~55%.


Good hands
Good hands are c-bet ~59% of the time. Mid pairs 66-99 are c-bet almost 100%, OESD gets
mostly c-bet, gutshots mostly like to check back and A-high flush draws are c-bet linearly, with
the strongest kickers being c-bet more often than the ones with weak kicker. K-high and Q-high
flush draws gets c-bet reverse linearly, with the highest kickers being checked back more often
and weaker flush draws being c-bet ~ 2/3 of the time.
Weak hands and trash hands
Air gets c-bet about 64% of the time, getting mostly bet/folded vs a flop x/r and only continuing
when having a diamond BDFD and a small frequency when having a heart.


Facing a 25% Pot x/r
On 5♥5♦4♥, the BB isn’t as polarized as it was on J66r because, on 5♥5♦4♥, many of the BB’s
hands that would be trash on J66 now have a flush draw, OESD or some sort of gutshot. This
makes the BN c-bet the flop less frequently on 5♥5♦4♥. The BB should x/r the flop vs a 1/3-pot
c-bet with a range that has a good mixture of strong hands such as full houses, trips, flush draws,
SD, gutshots, and backdoor equity combos.
   The BN’s GTO strategy vs a flop x/r has them 3-betting the flop 19% of the time using a 25%-
pot raise, calling 56% and folding 25%.The BN’s 3-betting range includes hands such as 38% of
trips (mostly with a high kicker), 34% overpairs (mostly JJ-66), 26% of flush draws (mostly A-
high flush draws with two overcards) and some A♥ and K♥ bluffs. The folding range is mostly
air and overcards with no draws or backdoor BDFD. The calling range is made of any pair+ and
draws that are raised and overcards with BDFD.


Note About Mixing and Balancing
It is important to understand that all of the mixing that happens with all hand types across all the
range examples does not have to be memorized. It simply serves the purpose of illustrating how
the solver divides up the ranges. In-game against human opponents, the options with any given
hand tend to be more binary and one action will yield a higher expectation than any other action.
Mixing can be used as a defensive measure against good players but, even then, getting the exact
right frequencies often times is neither possible nor necessary.



Developing OOP C-betting Strategies
OOP c-betting is fundamentally different from IP c-betting. When you are the player in position,
the Villain will generally be playing from the blinds with a wide range of about 50%-70% hands.
When the Villain cold calls (and is thus IP), their range will be much tighter, typically 4%-20%
hands. This significant difference in the Villain’s pre-flop range produces a more symmetric
post-flop equity distribution that results in a reduced overall betting frequency. The closer the
ranges are, the less incentivized you should be to start betting the flop.
  Now that you are OOP, there is another issue you don’t have when you are IP. Checking the
flop does not immediately allow you to see the turn and realize equity because, when you check
the flop from OOP, the IP player has the option to bet and force some of your hands to fold. For
this reason, you have to check a stronger range when OOP than when IP, as your range can be
immediately attacked by the Villain. This forces you to check a range that not only will be
balanced on the average turn card when the action goes x/x, but also a range that is balanced
immediately and can withstand aggression.
   Stack depth has a significant effect on pre-flop strategies and thus the cold call ranges will be
substantially different from one stack depth to the other, resulting in different post-flop equity
distributions. In this section, we will focus on BN cold calls because the BN is the position from
outside the blinds that typically cold calls the most. As for the opener, we will focus on CO and
UTG opens, to provide the two most extreme examples of this set-up, one against the widest
possible opening range, and once against the tightest. The play from all other positions will fall
within these two extremes.
   The stack depths we will study are 40bb and 20bb, typical for a MTT setup with 12.5% antes,
and the following betting structure:


  ♦ OOP can bet (20bb): all-in, 2/3-pot, 1/2-pot, 1/3-pot, min-bet

  ♦ OOP can bet (40bb): 3/4-pot, 2/3-pot, 1/2-pot, 1/3-pot, min-bet




                               Table 119: Hero vs BN Overall Stats

   The best situation for Hero is when is playing UTG with 40bb. In this set-up, both players
have almost the same number of hands in their ranges but Hero’s range dominates the BN in all
other set-ups. The BN’s range is tighter than Hero’s, creating a more equal situation that will
ultimately benefit the BN, given that they are playing IP post-flop.
   Of course, for the BN to achieve this favorable post-flop situation, they had to take a risk
when calling the open raise in the first place. So it is not as if the BN could simply cold call any
hand, as they would risk being pushed off by the blinds and also risk playing multi-way post-
flop, which will reduce their share of the pot.

Ranges in Play

The following hand ranges identify the ranges in play for the subsequent analysis (Hand Ranges
341-348)




                                  Hand Range 341: CO RFI 40bb
                                 • Open 2.3x 36.4% / • Fold 63.6%
Hand Range 342: BN vs CO 40bb
  • 3-bet 7.5% / • Call 19.6% /
          • Fold 72.9%
Hand Range 343: UTG RFI 40bb
• Open 2.3x 15.8% / • Fold 84.2%
    Hand Range 344: BN vs UTG 40bb
• 3-bet 5.2% / • Call 15.9% / • Fold 78.9%
Hand Range 345: CO RFI 20bb
• Open 2x 31.8% / • Fold 68.2%
     Hand Range 346: BN vs CO 20bb
• All-in 12.3% / • Call 8.4% / • Fold 79.2%
Hand Range 347: UTG RFI 20bb
• Open 2x 15.9% / • Fold 84.1%
                               Hand Range 348: BN vs UTG 20bb
                                 • All-in 4.6% / • 3-bet 0.3% /
                                  • Call 12.2% / • Fold 82.9%

  Overall, the strategies could be simplified to two bet-sizes, a big bet-size and a small bet-size,
depending on the flop. With 40bb, you can use 3/4-pot and min-bet or 1/3-pot, and with 20bb
2/3-pot and min-bet or 1/3-pot. I did not test 1/4-pot bet-size, but I think it would probably work
well and could potentially replace the min-bet and 1/3-pot. With deeper stacks, overbets should
be introduced to the play.
Diagram 69: 40bb 3-bet Pot Equity Buckets
Diagram 70
Diagram 71: 20bb 3-bet Pot Equity Buckets
                                           Diagram 72

   UTG c-bets a lot more frequently than the CO. In fact, the CO’s range is in general weaker
than the BN’s and CO could easily opt for a 100% checking strategy with minimal to no EV loss.
This is similar to the BB vs IP situation where the BB can opt to never donk bet the flop. This
strategy works well as an exploit against the population because most players tend to
automatically bet the flop when OOP checks to them, whereas the equilibrium strategy is to take
a stab at the pot half the time. Checking the flop with all hands allows Hero to play an aggressive
check/raising strategy, taking advantage of IP’s aggression, while reducing the effective SPR and
positional disadvantage.
   Many players make the mistake of c-betting way too often when OOP, particularly with weak
and trash hands, only to x/f the turn most of the time. This is a serious leak that can be easily
attacked by observant opponents who can call the flop bet and then fire the turn 100% of the time
when checked to.


C-betting Range Strategy Overview: UTG vs BN 40bbs
Much as with IP c-bets, OOP c-betting will heavily depend on the board. In this section, we will
examine UTG vs BN 40bb deep c-betting to get an overall picture of how the strategies change
when compared to playing IP.
                                          Diagram 73

   Even when OOP, UTG’s range is still strong enough to c-bet most of the time, checking the
flop 32% on average. Strong hands are checked 19% of the time, which is more than 3x as often
as when Hero is IP. Checking the flop does not immediately lead to a turn card, so Hero still has
to worry about IP betting after the flop check. For this reason, Hero needs to have, on average, a
stronger and more balanced checking range, allowing Hero to x/r the flop at a reasonable
frequency, thus offering protection him from IP betting too often with a large sizing when
checked to.
   When Hero is IP, the trash hands are generally c-bet more often than good and weak hands,
making this c-bet range more polarized. However, when Hero is OOP, this role reverses and
good and weak hands are c-bet more often than trash hands. The reason for this is that Hero still
has to act first on the turn, which will give away information about their hand strength. If they
bet too many low equity hands when OOP, their average turn range will be too weak and
consequently exploitable. For this reason, instead of putting in many chips with a lot of trash
hands only to later give up the pot, Hero simply checks them with the intention folding most of
the time vs a flop bet. Given that their checking range also has more strong hands than when they
are IP, Hero can expect the flop to go x/x more often, realizing equity for free.
                                          Diagram 74

  The texture most c-bet is trips. Hero has more overpairs and premium overcards that will turn
big pairs more often than IP, and IP’s range has many suited, connected type hands that are
complete trash and often have to fold. Paired boards are c-bet very often and, contrary to IP vs
BB situations, Hero as OOP uses big bet-sizes on paired boards, particularly on low rank flops.
When the Villain is in the BB, their range is much wider and can connect with trips in multiple
ways, but when they are on the BN, the number of hands that make trips is way lower. This
creates a situation where IP’s range will be capped, while OOP is uncapped, allowing OOP to
use a large bet-size, particularly on low and middle boards.
   The OOP player has a significant polarization advantage on rainbow flops, allowing them to
use bigger sizes more often. On the two-tone flops, the equity and EQR of many of OOP’s strong
hands gets reduced due to the presence of the flush draw, resulting in a reduced c-betting
frequency. Monotone boards improve IP’s equity distribution substantially. This results in OOP
using a small bet and c-betting only about 50% of hands.
                                         Diagram 75

  On Axx and high card flops, OOP has the range advantage and c-bets most of the time, while
on middle and low flops the equity distributions are symmetric, resulting in OOP playing a lot
more passively.
Diagram 76




Diagram 77
   IP’s range connects well on boards where there are possible straights and boards with straight
draws, because the BN’s cold call range has a lot of suited connectors and middle to small pocket
pairs. For this reason, OOP plays more passively on this type of dynamic board, while static
disconnected boards with no possible straights are better for Hero because they don’t improve
IP’s range as much.



C-betting in 3-bet Pots
In a 3-bet pot, the ranges in play are generally narrower than in a single raised pot. Additionally,
the way pre-flop ranges are constructed generally result in a more polarized post-flop equity
distribution for the pre-flop aggressor and a more condensed distribution for the pre-flop caller.
In this section, our study will focus on both IP and OOP c-betting strategies, with starting stacks
of 40bb and a typical MTT 12.5% ante structure with pre-flop GTO ranges. I recommend going
over Chapters 8 and 9 and reviewing the pre-flop 3-betting and calling ranges for the following
match-ups.


40bb Effective Stacks: Hero is the pre-flop aggressor and the Villain is the caller.


IP 3-betting
BN vs CO / BN vs MP / BN vs EP / CO vs MP / CO vs EP / EP vs EP


OOP 3-betting
BB vs BN / BB vs CO / BB vs EP / SB vs BN / SB vs CO / SB vs EP


Post-flop SPR: 1.7 to 2.
C-bet-sizes: all-in, 1/2-pot, 1/3-pot, 1/4-pot.
                                 Table 120: Hero Stats (IP 3bet)




                               Table 121: Hero Stats (OOP 3bet)

  Something very interesting is how the solver manages to create such similar post-flop
situations from the different pre-flop ranges, particularly when IP 3-bets. The players’ equities,
EQR and EVs are uniform across the board. In fact, the EQB are also similar and this results in
IP c-betting strategies being uniform for most of the match-ups.
                           Diagram 78: Hero IP 3-bet Equity Buckets




                          Diagram 79: Hero OOP 3-bet Equity Buckets

   In 3-bet pots, the pre-flop aggressor will generally have a polarization advantage, with almost
a 2-to-1 strong hand advantage, a 1.5-to-1 good hand advantage and with 1/3 of the calling
player’s range being trash hands. This equity distribution results in small bet-sizes being
generally preferred, particularly when Hero is IP.


IP 3-bet Strategy Overview
After 3-betting IP, Hero’s strategy on the flop will be to mostly use a small bet-size. The strategy
could easily be simplified to only 1/4-pot bet. On average, IP checks back the flop 38% of the
time. In my experience, most players tend to c-bet the flop way more than they should because
they tend to always c-bet their air. This trend happens because the population does not x/r the
flop in 3-bet pots as aggressively as they should, which allows IP to profitably c-bet trash hands.
Therefore a good counter-adjustment from OOP would be to step up the x/r frequency in 3-bet
pots.




                                           Diagram 80
                                       Diagram 81

  Given that IP has a substantial checking back range, many strong hands are checked back,
particularly when they block the Villain’s continuing range. For example top set QQ on Q82r
gets checked back 68% of the time.
                                         Diagram 82

  Trips and rainbow paired flops are the most frequently c-bet textures, with two-tone and
monotone flops being the least frequently c-bet. On two-tone flops, OOP has a great spot to x/r
with many flush draws, which would force Hero off the pot. For this reason, two-tone flops are
checked back at a high frequency, allowing many of IP’s good and weak hands to realize equity.
                                           Diagram 83

   Low and Kxx boards are the most frequently c-bet ranks. Middle boards with possible straight
draws are checked back with a medium frequency because they connect very well with OOP’s
range, but IP still has plenty of overpairs in their range. Qxx and Jxx flops, on the other hand,
connect well with the pre-flop caller’s range and also demote many of IP’s hands to second or
third pair, making IP more incentivized to check back.
   Axx is an interesting board. The population tends to c-bet Axx flops pretty much 100% of the
time. However, in simulations, Axx boards are static and polarize OOP’s range as they will
either have a strong hand, a medium strength hand that cannot call multiple bets, or a lot of trash
that cannot continue on the flop, but won’t improve much on most turns. Given those hand
values will not change much and, with a low SPR, all the money can easily go in on two streets.
For this reason, checking back the flop in order to get additional information from OOP when
they have to act on the turn makes a lot of sense, allowing IP to protect the flop check back range
with plenty of strong hands, while also realizing equity with medium strength hands.


OOP 3-bet Strategy Overview
On average, Hero realizes less equity when OOP compared to IP. When Hero is IP, it is possible
to check back a weaker range that will likely improve on the turn, while from OOP, Hero’s
checking range has to be balanced enough to face any aggression from IP. Some of the time Hero
also has to use bigger bet-sizes when OOP so as not to give too good a price to IP to continue
with a wide range. Using bigger bet-sizes also helps Hero by reducing the SPR, and with it the
positional disadvantage.
   The SB’s 3-betting range is, on average, a bit stronger than the BB’s range. This allows Hero
to c-bet slightly more frequently when in the SB compared to the BB.




                                          Diagram 84
Diagram 85




Diagram 86
  When OOP, Hero c-bets at a higher frequency across almost all flop textures, except for
monotone boards which will be c-bet at a similar frequency. From OOP, Hero will use bigger
bet-sizes compared to when IP.
  After 3-betting from the blinds, Hero likes to c-bet low boards at a high frequency, given they
have a stronger range with many overpairs. Middle boards get checked more often when they
have possible straights and straight draws. Qxx, Jxx and Txx boards are some of the most
checked boards because they connect well with IP’s range.




                                            Diagram 87

   An interesting difference is seen on Axx boards that get c-bet 77% of the time when Hero is
OOP but only 53% when Hero is IP. In both situations, the players’ equity distribution is similar,
and so the main difference seems to be that now, playing OOP, Hero doesn’t want to give the
option to the Villain to have a free turn when IP. If the action goes x/x on the flop, it is Hero who
will have to act first on the turn, giving away more range information. So, Hero decides to
mostly bet on Axx flops and force IP to fold some weak hands on the flop with a higher
frequency, avoiding complications by taking a passive line too often.



C-bet Defense
In no-limit hold’em, c-bet defense is highly susceptible to bet-sizing. Some players like using
MDF as pseudo-GTO strategy, but as we have already pointed out, while this number could in
some instances serve as a rough guideline, it does not take equities and range distribution into
account.

     Basing your entire strategy on MDF will be highly detrimental.

  For example, in the BB vs UTG 40bb situation, if UTG bets 1/3-pot then, according to MDF,
the BB is supposed to defend 75% of the time. However, on a flop such as AQ3r, the BB’s range
has 70% trash hands and 10% weak hands. On average, the BB’s trash hands have 16% equity
against UTG, but the pot odds laid by UTG’s bet-size are 20%. So even against the 1/3-pot bet-
size, calling many of those hands will be -EV.
   Raising would be even worse, as that puts even more money into the pot vs a strong range that
will not fold enough to make the bluff profitable. In this situation, the BB’s GTO defense
strategy vs the 1/3-pot bet-size has them folding 58% and defending only 42% of the time, which
is nowhere near the 75% MDF. On this flop, the UTG can get away with c-betting their entire
range and there is nothing the BB can do to stop them from having a profitable bet with any two
cards.
   So, if you are holding something like a 96s with a BDFD, a weak king-high or a small pocket
pair and have about 10-20% equity, you should simply fold even if the Villain is betting ATC.
Your pre-flop call was profitable and there will be other flops where your range will be much
stronger and you will either connect a strong hand, have a better bluffing opportunity, or your
opponent will simply check back more often, allowing you to realize more equity.

    Never try forcing matters! Your goal is not to try to win every hand you play, but to play
  each hand in the most profitable way. If calling and raising are -EV plays, then folding,
  which is always 0 EV, will be the highest EV play.

   You must be disciplined enough to make the right play.
   When facing a bet, it is of vital importance to always consider the Villain’s range that will take
that specific line. For example, when facing a min-bet, your pot odds will be amazing, but the
Villain will use a different range composition compared to when they bet the size of the pot. This
will have an effect on your strategy because your hands will have different equities depending on
how the Villain constructs their various betting ranges. If the Villain is the type of player who
will always c-bet strong hands and check back medium strength hands in a given spot, many of
the bottom of range hands you would defend against a GTO player will have way lower equity
against this unbalanced strategy. You can exploit this poor range construction by overfolding the
flop.
   In this section, we will examine in detail the BB vs IP c-bet defense match-up in a single
raised pot with 40bb stack depths. Our focus will once again be on BB vs BN and BB vs UTG,
so we can compare the BB’s strategy against both the widest and the tightest possible ranges. In
this match-up, IP can c-bet 1/4-pot, 1/3-pot, 1/2-pot, 2/3-pot and the BB has the options to x/r
50% pot, x/r 25% pot, call and fold. (The 25% raise size results in a smaller bet-size than 2x the
original bet-size when IP uses the 2/3-pot bet, so it was rounded up to a min-raise in the GTO
simulations).

40bb Single Raised Pot BB vs IP




                                    Diagram 88: BB vs UTG
                                   Diagram 89: BB vs BN




                                        Diagram 90

  The BB’s range is weaker against UTG than against the BN. This results in the BB folding on
average more hands when facing a c-bet from UTG than when facing a c-bet from the BN.
BB vs IP: Strategy Overview
In general, you want to x/r to a larger size when the Villain bets small, and x/r smaller when
Villain uses a larger bet-size. The BB needs to create some sort of indifference for IP’s c-betting
range. If the BB uses only the 25% x/r size, this could create a bias in IP’s strategy because the
weaker hands will never be priced out of the pot, as the total cost of bet/calling a hand against a
flop x/r will always be smaller when Villain decides to min-bet the flop.




                                    Diagram 91: BB vs UTG
                                      Diagram 92: BB vs BN

   Increasing the raise size when the Villain bets small keeps their lowest equity hands
indifferent to calling and folding. Similarly, when IP uses a large bet-size, the BB does not have
to make a large raise that could be over-committal. Often a check-min-raise suffices. An
exception to this rule would be in the case of all-in raises, as they get a better risk/reward ratio
when IP’s bet-size is large.
   The smaller IP’s bet-size, the more depolarized their betting range will be. This allows the BB
to increase their overall x/r frequency.
Diagram 93: BB vs UTG
                                   Diagram 94: BB vs BN

   The BB’s folding range is composed mostly of trash, so the BB’s total number of trash hands
is the main factor when determining their overall folding frequency.




                                  Diagram 95: BB vs UTG
                                    Diagram 96: BB vs BN

  Strong hands mostly want to x/r the flop, but many are also x/c with the intention to x/r on a
later street. This keeps the BB’s x/c range protected. Good hands mostly want to call, but some
of them want to x/r, particularly the combos that might need protection and unblock the Villain’s
continuing range, such as top pair in middle boards, bottom two pair on high boards and combo
draws that would benefit from getting all the money in on the flop or reducing the SPR so they
cannot be easily pushed off the pot on the turn.
   Weak hands are mostly x/c, but almost 1/3 of them get folded and about 15% get x/r. Trash
hands are mostly folded, but some get x/c and a few of them work well as x/r bluffing combos.
Diagram 97: BB vs UTG




Diagram 98: BB vs BN
General BB C-bet Defense Guidelines

 ♦ Avoid splitting your range early in the hand unless you have many strong hands you can
   distribute in a x/r and x/c range.

 ♦ Generally use large x/r bet-sizes against small c-bets, and small x/r sizes against large c-
   bets, except for against all-in bets that give a better risk:reward ratio.

 ♦ In general, flop x/r ranges are polarized, including made hands that are happy to get in vs
    a 3-bet and hands that are fine raise/folding. A losing proposition is to x/r good hands that
    are not good enough to get in on the flop while at the same time are too good to fold vs a
    raise. Think ahead and avoid putting yourself in tough spots.

 ♦ If your hand has a lot of equity but not too much showdown value, or if it is vulnerable to
    losing a lot of value in future streets, consider playing aggressively with the intention of
    getting the money in while your hand is still valuable.

 ♦ The deeper the stacks, the stronger the average hand you need to x/r the flop. Good draws
   that can be barreled across various streets increase in value.

 ♦ When a x/r is a possible strategy, always consider the blocker effects. A value hand that
   does not block the Villain’s continuing range makes a better x/r than one that does. For
   example, 44 on 9♥8♥4♥ makes a better x/r than 99. The opposite is true for bluffs. A
   bluff combo that blocks the Villain’s continuing range is more valuable than one that
   blocks the Villain’s bluff combos. If your hand blocks both bluffs and value, then try
   thinking about other variables that could sway your decision one way or the other.

 ♦ It is tough to x/c bottom pair across multiple streets, especially if the pair is small.
    Consider putting some of your bottom pairs in your flop x/r range.

 ♦ A-high and K-high are decent hands in many spots. Don’t be so quick to give up on them
   on the flop, especially if your opponent bets small.

 ♦ If your range has a lot of trash hands, you should fold a lot of it vs a c-bet, regardless of
    your opponent’s bet-size and the MDF.

 ♦ Don’t try to represent a small value range and hope your opponents will lay down a big
   hand. That just won’t happen often enough.
  ♦ Always be aware of the Villain’s bet-size and pot odds offered. Be realistic about your
    outs and equity.

  ♦ Your flop x/r range won’t necessarily consist of your strongest hands but, instead, hands
    that benefit from lowering the SPR and that have the right blockers (forward and
    reverse).

  ♦ Don’t be afraid to play aggressively on a flop where you have a lot of strong hands in
    your range.

  ♦ Flush draws and OESD are good hands, but they are not the nuts. You don’t have to x/r
    the flop every time you have a decent draw. It is important to have good board coverage
    in your x/c range too.

  ♦ Before snap folding your hand when you miss the flop, think for a few seconds about the
    way the equities are distributed on the flop. Consider how often the Villain should be
    betting the flop and how likely they are to fold to a flop x/r.


BB C-bet Defense Examples
Flop Strategy Example 1

BB vs 2/3-pot c-bet: BB vs UTG on A♥Q♦3♠ (40bb)




               Diagram 99: BB vs 2/3-pot c-bet: BB vs UTG on A♥Q♦3♠ (40bb)
   AQ3r is a horrible flop for the BB, who will only be able to capture 14% of the pot (half of
their equity). In this match-up, most of the BB’s range becomes trash hands with almost no hope
to improve. With only about 3% strong hands, there isn’t much the BB can do to stop UTG from
c-betting their range for a large bet-size, which forces a fold 68% of the time.




                                        Diagram 100
             Table 122: BB Strategy Breakdown vs UTG 2/3-pot c-bet on A♥Q♦3♠


 ♦ The only set the BB has is 33 and it gets x/r 100% of the time.

 ♦ Two pair gets x/r 42%, with Q3s being x/r 100%. A3s is x/r 1/3 of the time. AQo gets x/r
   40% and AQs only gets x/r about 7%. A3 needs some protection and benefits from
   reducing the SPR, while AQs helps protect the calling range and can be x/r on a later
   street.

 ♦ Top pair is never folded on the flop and gets x/r about 15% of the time. If the BB happens
   to have AK, it gets x/r every time. AJ gets x/r 63% of the time and all the other Ax get x/r
   about 6%.

 ♦ Second pair gets folded 25% and never gets x/r. The strongest KQ gets called 100%. The
   middling QJ-Q9 get folded about 53% of the time when not having a BDFD and the
   weaker kicker Q8s-Q2s gets called 100%. In this set-up, mid pair low kicker has better
   equity than the mid pair high kicker because most of the time the kicker is live.

 ♦ Pocket pairs between the queen and the three are always folded. This includes some
   pocket pairs as big as JJ and TT that would make bad bluff-catchers, as they have only
   two outs which aren’t even clean outs.

 ♦ Bottom pair is folded 66%. They can get called or even x/r sometimes as they have a lot
   more equity than a pocket pair such as 77. Any 3x can have up to 5 outs (another 3 plus
   the kicker). In this case, the weaker kickers are also more valuable than the high kickers,
   and hands such as K3s get folded 100%, while a hand like 53s can be x/r 43%, x/c 20%
   and x/f 36.5%. Usually bottom pairs are not great hands to call down, but they work well
   as semi-bluffs.

 ♦ Big gutshots such as KJ can be called most of the time. The weaker KT and JT play a
   mixed strategy, sometimes calling and sometimes folding. Wheel gutshots that can make
   an A-5 straight can be x/r some of the time when they have a BDFD but are mostly
   folded when they don’t.

 ♦ King-high no draw and all the rest of the air makes up 48% of BB’s range and is simply
   folded every time.

Flop Strategy Example 2
BB vs Min-bet: BB vs UTG on Q♥J♥T♥ (40bb)




                Diagram 101: BB vs Min-bet: BB vs UTG on Q♥J♥T♥ (40bb)




                                       Diagram 102

   On QJT monotone, the BB has a substantial equity disadvantage, with only 36% equity. They
are also only able to realize 79% of their equity, capturing 28% of the pot and folding, on
average, 38.26% of the time against a flop min-bet, looking to x/r 18% and x/c 43%.




                Table 123: BB Strategy Breakdown vs UTG Min-bet on Q♥J♥T♥


  ♦ The straight flush makes only a tiny portion of the BB’s range but, when having it, the
    BB’s EV is more than 3x the size of the pot! On this flop, if the BB has a straight flush it
    is very unlikely for UTG to also have a flush as most of the possible hands that could
    make a flush are blocked by the board and Hero’s hand. For this reason, Hero will mostly
    slowplay the nuts. In the event that IP has an A-high flush or the A♥, the money will go
    all-in most of the time regardless of how the BB plays their hand, so it makes sense for
    the BB to let IP do most of the betting.

  ♦ Flush combos get x/r most of the time. A-high and K-high flushes get x/r about 1/3 of the
    time, reverse linearly with the highest kickers being x/r less often than the low kicker. For
    example, A9s never gets x/r, A5s gets x/r 57% and A2s gets x/r about 88% of the time.
    Lower flush combos are x/r about 88% of the time.
  ♦ Straights are rarely x/r unless they have a flush draw, averaging a x/r frequency of 20%.

  ♦ The BB never has top set. Middle and bottom set are x/r about 22% of the time.

  ♦ Two pair is x/r about 17%.

  ♦ Top pair averages 44% equity on a board as connected as this one with so many flush,
    straight, set and two pair combinations. Top pair is simply not a strong hand on this
    texture.

  ♦ Weaker middle pair combos can be x/f most of the time and occasionally x/r. J9 and better
    can also be x/r with some frequency, and any Jx with a higher kicker plays a 100% call
    strategy.

  ♦ Weak bottom pairs (T8-T2) are almost always folded. T8 can get x/r a small frequency,
    and T9 can be x/r half the time. Bottom pair with a higher kicker is always called.

  ♦ Underpairs are always folded unless they have a flush draw.

  ♦ Combo draws are x/r about 1/3 of the time and x/c 2/3. The ones with showdown value
    such as AT or KJ with a heart are mostly called and the ones without showdown value
    can be x/r about half the time.

  ♦ On this flop, any high flush draw will either be a made hand or a combo draw. This leaves
    the flush draw category with mostly weak flush draws such as 76o and 55 type hands.
    This category gets x/r about 1/3 of the time and called 2/3.

  ♦ OESD will only continue if they are drawing to the nut straight. All 9x except 99 are
    folded 100%, A8o also gets folded 100%, Kx and A9 without a heart can be x/r about
    half the time and x/c the other half.

  ♦ All gutshots are folded unless they have a pair.

  ♦ A-high and K-high hands always have at least a gutshot.

  ♦ Air hands such as 7-high no draw are simply always folded.

Flop Strategy Example 3

BB vs 2/3-pot c-bet: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bbs)
               Diagram 103: BB vs 2/3-pot c-bet: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bbs)




                                           Diagram 104

   On 9♥8♥4♦, the BB’s range only has about 4% strong hands against UTG. This results in
UTG using a large bet-size and the BB having a low x/r frequency of about 4%. The BB’s
strategy consists of waiting until the turn to start splitting their range, depending on the runout.
This avoids revealing information about their range on the flop. If the UTG uses a 1/3-pot c-bet-
size instead, the BB increases their x/r frequency to ~15%. In general, flops with one or more
possible flopped straights are better for the BB, and flops without flop straights tend lower their
EV.




              Table 124: BB Strategy Breakdown vs UTG 2/3-pot c-bet on 9♥8♥4♦


  ♦ Sets are only x/r about 12% of the time, with 99-88 being almost always called, and 44
    only getting x/r when it has a heart. The reason for this is that IP has the bigger sets so
    having a heart gives the BB a little extra equity in the case of running into a cooler
    situation. The idea of the BB having to x/r this flop every time they have a strong hand
    because of the possible straight and flush draws is unfounded as these draws only make
    up about 10.5% of UTG’s range. In this case, the lack of strong combos in the BB’s range
    and keeping their information advantage is more important for the BB than “protecting”
    the hand. In this situation, the BB compensates for the lack of flop aggression with an
    aggressive turn donking strategy on favorable runouts.
  ♦ Two pair are x/r about 18% of the time, with 98 and 84 being x/r more frequently than 94.
    Typically, the solver shows a slight preference to x/c top and bottom two pair when
    compared to top two and bottom two. Top two are the most nutted ones, so it makes
    sense to x/r them more frequently, and bottom two pair needs more protection and
    unblocks top pair, while top and bottom blocks top pair in the Villain’s range.

  ♦ Overpairs JJ-TT are the most x/r hands, as they have good equity but are vulnerable. JJ is
    x/r 100% and TT mostly x/r when having the T♥.

  ♦ Top, middle pair and bottom always get x/c. 77-55 are almost always folded except for 77
    with a heart.

  ♦ Combo draws are x/r 1/3 of the time and x/c 2/3 of the time. Q♥J♥ and Q♥T♥ are x/r
    100%. J♥T♥ and J♥7♥ are x/r about 1/3 and lower combo draws are mostly x/c.

  ♦ Flush draws are only x/r about 10% of the time. The most frequently x/r combos are ATs-
    A5s ~60%

  ♦ OESD are x/c every time. These combos have good equity vs IP’s c-bet range but are too
    weak against IP’s flop 3-betting range as they will often be dominated by overpairs or
    flush draws.

  ♦ Gutshots with two overcards or a BDFD are called, the rest get folded.

  ♦ A-high is mostly folded, except AJ+ plus BDFD that gets called about 40%.

  ♦ K-high is mostly folded except for a few KQ with the K♥ that occasionally gets called.

  ♦ Air is folded 100% of the time.

Flop Strategy Example 4

BB vs Minbet: BB vs BN on J♠6♥6♦ (40bbs)
                  Diagram 105: BB vs Minbet: BB vs BN on J♠6♥6♦ (40bbs)




                                        Diagram 106

   On J♠6♥6♦, the BB’s range gets heavily polarized with a reasonable amount of strong hands
that connect trip sixes. This results in the BB having a healthy x/r range of about 27%, using
mostly the bigger x/r size.
               Table 125: BB Strategy Breakdown vs BN Min-bet on J♠6♥6♦


♦ The BB never has quads as they would always 3-bet 66 pre-flop.

♦ Full houses are rarely x/r. J6 does not need any protection and it blocks IP’s top pair
  combos.

♦ Trips are x/r reverse linearly 80% of the time and x/c 20%. Trips with high kicker work
  better as x/c because they block IP’s overcards and overpairs.

♦ Top pairs with high and middle kickers are often x/r when they have a BDFD and x/c
  otherwise.

♦ Underpairs 44-22 are always x/c.

♦ A-high hands are always x/c.

♦ K-high, on average, gets x/r about 22% and x/c 65%. K6+ are almost always x/c and K-
  high with a low kicker mostly gets folded unless it has a BDFD.

♦ Air, Q7+ with a BDFD, gets x/r most of the time and x/c without a BDFD. Q5-Q2 with a
  BDFD are mostly x/c and sometimes x/r, and combos without a BDFD are mostly folded.
  The rest of the air combos are x/r most of the time and x/c sometimes when they have a
  BDFD and a BDSTD and otherwise folded.
13




GTO TURN
STRATEGIES
Given the sheer size of the possible turn strategies on all different lines and runouts it will not be
possible to take an approach as exhaustive as we did in the pre-flop and flop sections. However,
we will cover the most important concepts that drive GTO play on this street, applying the
overall knowledge we have built throughout this book.
   Turn play can be extremely challenging for many players, particularly if they are
inexperienced. However, in reality, turn play isn’t as different from flop play as it may appear.

     In order to make an educated decision, the main concepts you need to keep in mind are
  the pot size, the effective stacks, the ranges in play and the board.

   The stacks and pot size are obvious, so we are left with the ranges in play and the board. The
ranges in play can be deconstructed from the previous action taken by the players involved in the
hand. Assessing the distribution and polarization of the equity of different ranges after a given
action line is difficult for many players.
   GTO does not care, nor does it take into account, any history from the current or any past
hands. It does not care about the betting on the previous round, (x/x) or (x/b/c), or who was the
previous aggressor. All a GTO solver needs to compute the equilibrium strategy pair for two
players are the ranges in play, the board, the stacks, the pot size and a betting abstraction. The
hand history and players’ actions leading to the decision point are what we humans need to know
so we can have an idea of the ranges in play.
   Knowing all the exact ranges for all players in all possible strategic lines by heart is clearly
impossible. We cannot compute the GTO strategy for each combo, nor can we memorize solver
strategies for every single spot. What we can do is focus our study on some of the key strategic
lines and familiarize ourselves with the general morphology of ranges, the equity distributions
and how they are affected by the board runout. Every decision point is simply a new puzzle with
new pieces. All you have to do is use your knowledge and expertise to put the pieces together
and make the best decision possible with the information you have. The only way to get really
good at solving that puzzle is through deliberate practice.
  Deliberate practice refers to a special type of practice that is purposeful and systematic. While
regular practice might include mindless repetitions, deliberate practice requires focused attention
and is conducted with the specific goal of improving performance. If you want to know more
about deliberate practice, I recommend Purposeful Practice for Poker by Dr. Tricia Cardner and
Gareth James (dandbpoker.com).



Key Strategy Lines
In the same way as how the ranges in play are different on the flop depending on the pre-flop
action, the ranges in play on the turn will be different depending on the previous actions. There
are many different flop lines that lead to a turn, but not all of them are equally important. Some
lines will happen more frequently than others and will have a bigger impact on your long-term
expectation. These are called Key Strategy Lines and, just like when we studied the flop, we do
not have to look at every single line leading to a turn in order to understand turn play. We will
only focus on some of the key strategy lines to understand turn play.
   In this section, we will continue with the Flop Strategy Examples 1, 2, 3 and 4, focusing our
study on turn play after the flop action goes x/x and the action goes x/b/c.

Flop Line: IP Checks back (x/x)


  ♦ OOP First Action (x/x/?)

  ♦ IP vs Bet (x/x/b/?)

  ♦ IP vs Check (x/x/x/?)

  ♦ OOP Check vs Bet (x/x/x/b/?)

Flop Line: IP C-bets & OOP Calls (x/b/c)


  ♦ OOP First Action (x/b/c/?)

  ♦ IP vs Donk bet (x/b/c/d/?)

  ♦ IP vs Check (x/b/c/x/?)
  ♦ OOP Check vs C-bet (x/b/c/x/b/?)



Turn Play After Flop Check Back (x/x)
IP Range

If IP is checking back a GTO strategy, then their range will have the right board coverage and be
fairly balanced on most runouts. Still, IP’s checking back range will be somewhat capped and a
lot more depolarized than their c-betting range as they would have c-bet most of their strong
hands on the flop.

OOP Range

If OOP doesn’t have a donk betting range, then they have exactly the same range with which
they called the pre-flop raise. This means two things. First, this range is very wide compared to
IP’s range, and second, that this range is still uncapped.
   The way the ranges are constructed is somewhat reverse of the flop situation, making OOP’s
range more polarized than IP’s and IP’s range more condensed than OOP’s. This range
distribution generally results in OOP developing a turn betting strategy.
   If IP is checking back a non-GTO range, this range will lack the right board coverage and will
be heavily capped on many different runouts while being overly represented on others. For
example, let’s consider the flop strategy Example 3 of 9♥8♥4♥. If IP never checks back hands
such as 99 and 88, then OOP’s turn strategy on a blank turn such as 2♣ drifts from betting 27%
of the time to betting 77% of the time, and IP’s EV decreases from 54% of the pot on that
specific turn card to 41%. The effect is even greater if IP never checks back a flush draw or any
strong hand on the flop. Then if a flush card such as the 5♥ comes, IP’s EV decreases to 11%.
   You should also be aware when IP checks back a flop that should be c-bet at a high frequency.
For example, on AQ3r, if IP checks back they almost always have some sort of made hand and
not much air, because people intuitively understand they should c-bet that flop at a high
frequency but still struggle to bet hands such as A with a low kicker, KK, Qx, JJ and TT. This
strategy is terrible, as it results in IP’s range being pretty much face-up, allowing OOP to play
accurately against it. Sometimes players will also check back a hand such as AA, trying balance
the fact that they are checking back a weak capped range but this doesn’t help them as much as
they might think. When OOP has an A, there is only one combo of AA left, and this allows OOP
to play the Ax very aggressively without having to be too worried about IP having them beat.
This also allows OOP to check/fold quite effectively on the turn if IP decides to make a delayed
c-bet.


OOP First Action




                              Table 126: Turn Decision Point Stats

  Checking back almost never happens at equilibrium on A♠Q♦3♠ and Q♥J♥T♥. For this reason,
IP’s range on the turn contains only 1.4 and 1 combos, respectively. This doesn’t mean that there
is a single hand IP is checking back, but that they are checking a tiny fraction of the time with a
wide variety of hands. This is, as we discussed before, something totally impractical and
unnecessary. Even if IP was checking a GTO range in this spot, this line would only happen less
than 1% of the time. Still, I wanted to include these flops so we have an idea of how OOP’s
strategy changes on the four different boards (Diagram 107).
                                         Diagram 107

  OOP has three different bet-sizes to choose from: 1.2x-pot, 2/3-pot and 1/3-pot.
   As we can see, the average OOP strategy will be different on the turn for the different flop
textures. This is again due to the different ranges the players will have on each board, and also
because of how the ranges interact with each of the boards.
   The OOP strategy when first to act on the turn will also be different within each one of these
flops depending on which turn card is dealt.


IP vs Bet




                             Table 127: Turn Decision Point Stats
                                        Diagram 108

   On 9♥8♥4♦, IP raises a 1/3-pot bet 19% of the time and never raises an OOP overbet on
J♠6♥6♦ (Diagram 108). The reason is that, on 9♥8♥4♦, OOP’s betting frequency and bet-size are
smaller than on J♠6♥6♦ because the polarization of the ranges is different in both cases. On
9♥8♥4♦, OOP’s betting range is more condensed and IP has more strong hands, allowing IP to
have a raising range. On J♠6♥6♦, OOP’s range is more polarized and IP does not have that many
strong hands compared to OOP.


IP vs Check




                            Table 128: Turn Decision Point Stats

  This line happens frequently, overall 14% of the time on 9♥8♥4♦ and 24% on J♠6♥6♦.
                                          Diagram 109

   On the average turn on 9♥8♥4♦, IP likes to bet 2/3-pot because OOP should not have too
many strong hands after checking twice on a board as dynamic as this one, because most of their
strong hands would bet at some point earlier.
   On J♠6♥6♦, IP mostly uses the 1/3-pot bet as this board is quite static. Most hands that were
strong on the flop will still be quite strong on the turn and the river, so OOP can afford to
slowplay and trap them without risking being outdrawn as often. Also, most hands that were
weak or trash on the flop won’t have improved on the turn and won’t improve too much on the
river. So, OOP is forced to play more passively on the turn, checking most of their range. In this
situation, OOP’s range will remain fairly polarized, so IP can take a stab at the pot using a small
bet-size and expect to get many folds (Diagram 109).


OOP vs Bet
                              Table 129: Turn Decision Point Stats




                                           Diagram 110

  OOP folds slightly more to the IP stab on 9♥8♥4♦ because IP’s bet-size is bigger, making it
more difficult for OOP’s weak hands to continue. Also, OOP x/r the flop more on J♠6♥6♦
because their range is more polarized, and also because IP’s bet-size is smaller. If IP overbets the
pot instead, then OOP would only x/r about 3% hands on J♠6♥6♦ (Diagram 110).



Turn Play After Flop C-bet and Call (x/b/c)
In general, IP will c-bet most strong and trash hands on the flop, making their flop c-betting
range more polarized. At the same time OOP will fold most trash and raise some of strong hands
against the flop c-bet. This makes OOP’s range more condensed coming to the turn after the
action goes x/b/c.


OOP First Action




                              Table 130: Turn Decision Point Stats

  Equities run much closer after the flop goes x/c, but the overall polarization will, in general, be
in favor of the previous street’s aggressor and the caller will tend to have the most condensed
range.




                                           Diagram 111
   Since OOP’s range will typically be more depolarized than IP’s, we see a general trend from
OOP to check to IP (Diagram 111). However, similarly to the flop donk bet, there will be some
turns that will make OOP’s range more polarized and IP’s more condensed, resulting in an
increased OOP betting frequency.
   The solver typically likes to use small bet-sizes when donk betting the flop compared to
betting the turn after a x/x flop. This is because of the difference of the polarization of the ranges
in both cases.


IP vs Donk Bet




                               Table 131: Turn Decision Point Stats
                                        Diagram 112

   Since turn donk bets aren’t as common as on the flop, this line happens rarely. Because in
most situations IP has position and an uncapped range, they won’t be folding a lot vs the donk
bet and, instead, will be raising at a high frequency (Diagram 112).
   Even in modern games, people still fail to donk bet the flop as often as they could and many
players will simply auto-check the turn without giving much thought about how it affects the
ranges.


IP vs Check




                             Table 132: Turn Decision Point Stats
                                         Diagram 113

   This line happens frequently, probably even more so in real games as most people fail to donk
bet the flop nearly as much as the GTO solver recommends. In general, after the flop goes x/b/c
and OOP checks one more time on the turn, IP’s range will be very polarized and OOP’s range
will be mostly condensed. This effect gets magnified on some turn cards that give way more
strong hands to IP than to OOP, resulting in IP preferring bigger bet-sizes, and in some cases
even overbets (Diagram 113).
  On A♥Q♦3♠, OOP’s range will still be capped on most turn cards. For this reason, we see IP
continue to bet 2/3-pot with the intention to jam the river at a high frequency.


OOP vs Turn C-bet




                             Table 133: Turn Decision Point Stats
                                          Diagram 114

  Facing a second barrel puts OOP in a tough spot. At this point, OOP will have a reasonable
equity disadvantage, their range will be very depolarized and IP’s range will be even more
polarized than it was on the flop (Diagram 114).



Turn Categories
There are 49 possible turn cards for every single flop, and each turn will impact the ranges in
play in some way. This will consequently affect the players’ GTO strategies. In this sense, turn
play is not so different to flop play where players have to be mindful of the way the board runout
affects the equity distributions, while at the same time being aware of the possibility of a new
card coming and impacting equities again on a later street.
   Studying each individual turn for every single flop would also be highly inefficient. For this
reason, we will need some sort of turn groupings in a similar way to how we previously created
the flop groupings.
   Most turn cards can be categorized as being in one or more of the following groups:
  ♦ Paired Board: Turn cards that pair the board.

  ♦ Flush: Turn cards that complete a flush.

  ♦ Straight: Turn cards that complete an OESD.

  ♦ Ace: The ace is a special card and it often has a significant effect.

  ♦ Overcard: Turn cards higher than top pair.

  ♦ Brick/Blank: Turn card that doesn’t connect with the board in a meaningful way.

   The overcard and undercard categories can be subdivided into cards that bring a backdoor
flush draw and cards that don’t.


Flop Strategy 1: Turn Play after Flop Checks Back (x/x)

OOP First Action: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bb)
                                     Diagram 115

  On 9♥8♥4♦, OOP has the polarization advantage on many turn cards, resulting in a high
betting frequency (Diagram 115).
Diagram 116




Diagram 117
   In general, low cards that complete straights, a 9, 8 or 4 pairing the board, and hearts are good
turns for OOP (Diagram 116). Overcards to the board that don’t complete many straights, and
particularly the aces, are good for IP. The effect of the turn card suit is seen in Diagram 117.




                   Table 134: OOP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/x)




                   Table 135: OOP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/x)




                    Table 136: IP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/x)




                    Table 137: IP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/x)
   OOP does well on the average turn card, with 48% equity, and over-realizes it to win 53% of
the pot. The worst possible turn cards for OOP are offsuit aces such as A♠/A♣ where their EV
decreases to 25.8%. The best possible turn cards are offsuit 5x such as 5♠/5♣ where their EV
increases to 64.17% of the pot. Notice how there is a correlation between OOP’s EQ and EV,
although the highest EQ card is not necessarily the highest EV card (Tables 134-137).




                                          Diagram 118

 The EQB charts for the A♠ and the 5♠ turn cards demonstrate just how much range
morphology can vary according to the runout, even after the same action line on the same flop
(Diagram 118). This has a substantial impact on the players’ equilibrium strategies.
  Some players struggle to assimilate how a hand that was very strong on a previous street can
be demoted and become weaker on a later street. They get emotionally attached to the initial
value of their hand and feel entitled to win the pot just because they started with the strongest
hand. Nevertheless, this is just all part of the game.

     Poker is a game of equities, how much we have, how it is distributed and how we realize
  it while preventing our opponents from realizing theirs.

   On countless occasions I have heard players say something along the lines of, “Every time I
have AA, the flush or the straight card comes. I’m so unlucky.” You are supposed to have your
strong hands demoted sometimes. It can be predicted mathematically and should be expected.
So, you should be prepared for the times it happens.

     Know your range, as well as your opponent’s and understand that, even if on that
  occasion you might lose a big pot sometimes, you will be the one who has the best of it. The
  important thing is to play well and adjust correctly to how the situations change. This
  allows you to prevail in the long run.


Flop Strategy 2: Turn Play after Flop C-bet and Call (x/b/c)

OOP First Action: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bb)




                                         Diagram 119
                                         Diagram 120

   After OOP x/b/c the flop, both players’ equities will run very close on the average turn card
(Diagram 119). In fact, OOP has higher EQ (51.65%), but under-realizes it, capturing only
48.6% of the pot, while IP, with 46.6% EQ, captures 51.4% of the pot. Similarly to the flop donk
bet, on the turn OOP chooses to donk bet when IP does not have as many dominant strong hands
in their range and, instead, has many weaker hands that will benefit from checking back the turn
(Diagram 120).
Diagram 121




Diagram 122
   The best cards for OOP to donk bet the turn are 9, 8 and 4 that pair the board, 7, 6, 5 that
complete straights, and blank low offsuit cards. The worst cards to donk bet are the ones that
connect well with IP’s range, which are aces, high cards, and diamonds that would give the IP
player a BDFD (Diagrams 121-122).




                 Table 138: OOP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c)




                 Table 139: OOP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c)




                  Table 140: IP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c)
                   Table 141: IP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c)

   OOP does pretty well when the turn is a heart and will, on average, have more flush combos
than IP. However, OOP doesn’t lead them as often because the flushes aren’t as nutted as IP’s,
who will have more nut flushes in their range. The worst cards for OOP are offsuit kings, such as
K♣/K♠, and the best cards are offsuit 5s, such as 5♣/5♠ (Tables 138-141).




                                         Diagram 123

  On a flop as dynamic as 9♥8♥4♦, both players’ equity distributions will change drastically
according to the board runout (Diagram 123). This has a significant effect on the players’
equilibrium strategies, with OOP wanting to take advantage of the turn cards that give them a
massive range advantage by betting aggressively. Naturally, IP will choose to play more
passively in these situations.


IP vs Check: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bb) (x/b/c/x)




                                        Diagram 124
                                           Diagram 125

   Typically, the IP player will have a substantial polarization advantage after OOP has checked
twice. IP follows a similar trend we already saw on the flop, choosing to split their range. This
leads to c-betting once again with most of their strong hands and checking back most of their
good hands that don’t want to bet/fold and will benefit from seeing a free river. IP will c-bet over
65% of the time and will mostly use a 2/3-pot bet-size (Diagrams 124-125).
Diagram 126




Diagram 127
  The 9, 8 and 4 are bad cards for IP, but they still want to bet them at a high frequency when
checked to. This happens because IP expects OOP to have a high donk betting frequency on
those turn cards, so when they do check, their range will not have as many strong combos. At the
same time, there are many hands in OOP’s range that will not connect at all with the 9, 8 or 4.
So, by betting small, IP can still get many folds. On most other runouts, IP will bet a more
polarized range and opt to use a bigger bet-size (Diagrams 126-127).




                Table 142: OOP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x)




                Table 143: OOP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x)




                 Table 144: IP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x)
                 Table 145: IP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x)

  IP does extremely well on high cards, particularly the offsuit aces and kings. The heart ones
actually block many of IP’s flush combos and result in an EV drop (Tables 142-145).


OOP vs Turn 2/3-pot C-bet: BB vs UTG on 9♥8♥4♦ (40bb) (x/b/c/x/b)




                                        Diagram 128
                                          Diagram 129

   Facing the second barrel is not great for OOP. At this point, both players have split their
ranges several times. IP would be checking back a lot of medium strength hands and is now
betting with a very polarized range. OOP would have bet or raised many strong hands by now, so
their range is weak against IP’s turn c-betting range, resulting in OOP folding, on average, over
40% vs a turn c-bet. Most strong hands will be x/r on the turn, but some will still be slowplayed,
leaving OOP’s x/c range protected, even on brick runouts (Diagrams 128-129).
Diagram 130




Diagram 131
  On average, OOP will x/r the turn 14% of the time and will be mostly going all-in, as a
smaller raise size would commit too many chips. In general, their weaker x/r hands are semi-
bluffs that will have the equity to call an all-in bet and thus be committed (Diagrams 130-131).




              Table 146: OOP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x/b67)




              Table 147: OOP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x/b67)




               Table 148: IP EQ Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x/b67)




               Table 149: IP EV Heatmap by turn card on 9♥8♥4♦ (x/b/c/x/b67)
    OOP has on average 45% EQ when facing a turn c-bet, but will only be able to realize 77% of
it, for a total EV of 21% of the pot. IP has an average EQ of 55%, and will over-realize it by a
large margin with an EQR factor of 144%, capturing 79% of the pot.




14




GTO RIVER
STRATEGIES
In a sense, the river is the easiest street to play, yet most players struggle with it. In fact, the river
is actually where the most mistakes are made and most of the money is won or lost. By the time
we get to the river, the pot will generally be a lot bigger than it was on the previous streets.
Bigger pots mean bigger bets (often all-in) and, with bigger bets, mistakes can get very costly.
   Calculating river equilibrium and exploitative strategies on a given runout from the players’
ranges, SPRs and betting abstractions in any decision point is relatively easy, especially with
modern GTO solvers. The river calculations typically take a split second. What makes the river
challenging is that it is the most difficult street on which to estimate players’ starting ranges.
   At the beginning of each hand, all players have the exact same range: 100% or 169
strategically unique hands. As the players take different actions, their pre-flop ranges become
narrower, so the flop starting ranges aren’t too difficult to estimate either. During post-flop play,
the players’ pre-flop ranges interact with the board in various ways and suits become relevant,
forcing us to keep track of specific hand combinations. Post-flop play depends on the way the
board runs out and the ranges derived from the previous street actions. All of this makes it
significantly more difficult to figure out the players’ exact ranges the deeper we are in the hand.
Also, since most poker hands are over before showdown, players are a lot less experienced
playing the later streets. With all the possible runouts and ways to get to the river, it is no
surprise that most players struggle with river play.
   Fortunately, we don’t have to memorize every single action line and range getting to the river.
The river has some unique characteristics that simplify the calculations and make abstract models
and toy games particularly useful to accurately represent river scenarios.
  ♦ On the river there are no more cards to come, so the values of the hands are fixed. There
    are no draws, resulting in each hand having either 100% or 0% equity vs another hand.

  ♦ The hand vs range equity is simply the fraction of the opponent’s range the hand beats
    plus half of the hands it ties with, if there are any. For example, if a hand has 50% equity
    vs the Villain’s range, that means it is ahead of 50% of the Villain’s range and behind
    against the other half.

  ♦ There is a linear ordering of hands in terms of strength that is history independent. This
    means that the ranking of all possible river hands from strongest to weakest is the same
    no matter how they got there.

  ♦ There are no future street betting rounds to worry about. Any call or IP check in a heads-
    up pot immediately ends the hand and realizes equity.



Setting up a River Abstract Model
Setting up this model can be done as follows.


  ♦ List all river hands in both ranges in descending order of strength and split them according
    to who has them.

  ♦ Assign weights.

  ♦ Establish the blocker effects.

  ♦ Set up a game tree.

   Table 150 represents the nuts/air vs bluff-catcher situation with Player1 having a polarized
range (50% nut hands, 50% air), and Player2 having 100% bluff-catchers (hand 5) that always
lose to the nuts (hand 1) but wins against the bluffs (hand 10). If there are any blocker effects, we
can represent them in a matrix as follows (Table 151).
Table 150: Ranges Composition (Polar Versus Bluff-catcher)




   Table 151: Hypothetical Blocker Relationship Matrix
According to the blocker matrix:


  ♦ All hands block themselves

  ♦ Hand 1 blocks Hand 3

  ♦ Hand 3 blocks Hand 1

  ♦ Hand 6 blocks Hands 8 and 9

  ♦ Hands 8 and 9 block Hand 6

  ♦ All other hands do not block each other.

   Of course, a real river solution would include many more hands, with different weights and a
more complex blocker relationship, but in essence all you need to fully define a river situation
are the ranges table, the blocker relationship, and a game tree with the pot size, stack sizes and a
betting structure. This is, in fact, how all GTO solvers work. They have a list of all possible
rivers and which hands have blockers on each river. The hands are listed in order of strength and
the players’ ranges tell the solver who has which hand and how often they have it. It doesn’t
matter how the players got to the specific river situation. As long as they arrive to the overall
same structure, the GTO strategy pair in that situation will be equivalent.
   For example, the nuts/air vs bluff-catcher situation can be described in a different way with
different hands. However, as long as one player has half of their range as the effective nuts, and
the other half being air relative to their opponent’s range, and the other player’s range is 100% of
bluff-catchers, then the GTO solution will be the exact same.
                    Table 152: Ranges Composition (Polar vs Bluff-catcher)

   Table 152 also represents a nuts/air vs bluff-catcher situation. P2’s range (hands 4-7) can only
beat hands 8-9 in P1’s range and always loses to hands 2-3. This ranges structure and the ones
presented in Table 151 result in equivalent GTO strategies.
   This result is of vital importance. If we think about a game tree, there are thousands or
possibly tens of thousands of rivers that might come up, so we need to be able to categorize or
bucket them into types of scenario that we can identify and solve.
   For example, if you can recognize the river situation as being polar vs bluff-catcher, you will
know that the GTO strategy for the polar player is to always go all-in with their nut hands and
the Alpha % of their bluffs. and the bluff-catching player has to call with 1-Alpha of their range.
It doesn’t really matter if the nuts are a full house, flush, straight or any combination of those
hands. The only important thing would be the overall ranges composition where one player’s
range is 50% nuts and 50% air, and the other player’s range consists of 100% bluff-catchers.



River Abstract Models
The river characteristics we just described make the [0-1] game we studied earlier the perfect fit
to analyze the mechanics of river play. In this section, we will look at several river abstract
models, compute them in a GTO solver and generate heuristics on how to approach the most
typical river situations players can expect to face.
River [0-1] Game Setup
Board: 2♠2♣2♥2♦3♣
Pot: 100 chips
Stack: Players will start with 500 chip stacks, but we analyze examples with different stack
depths to understand the SPR effect on the equilibrium strategies.
Heads-up Pot: There are two players involved in the hand, P1 and P2.
Betting Structure: Both players are allowed to bet, x/r, call, go all-in and fold.
Players Hand Strength: This is represented in Table 153.




                                  Table 153: Hand Strength

   AA is the strongest hand, 33 the weakest and suits will be set up so there are no blocker
effects. The blocker effect will be studied later.
   This discussion will be centered around two main groups of abstract models:


  ♦ Polarized with no ranges overlapping between the players.

  ♦ Linear models where both players can have any type of hand value.


Perfectly Polarized vs Bluff-catcher
The perfectly polarized (nuts/air) vs bluff catcher is the easiest river abstract model to study. We
should already be familiar with this river setup. If not, return to Chapter 2 for a quick refresher
on this example, as the next river situations will be a variation of this set-up.




                     Table 154: Players Range Composition Table (Combos)

   The effective stack size does not affect the general strategy. In this set-up, the polarized
player’s EV increases with bet-size, and so their equilibrium strategy is to always go all-in with
nut hands (KK-QQ) and bluff the air hands (77-66) with an Alpha frequency. Position also
doesn’t matter. P2 will never bet, and their strategy when facing a bet is to call 1-Alpha of the
time with all hands (JJ-88) (Table 154).


All of P1’s Range is Stronger Than P2’s Range
In the situation in Table 155, P2 has 0% equity in the pot. At equilibrium, P2 should never put
any more money into the pot and never call a bet of any size. P2 should never bet because P1
will never fold (P1 knows P2’s range is capped at 99).
   P1 won’t bet either since betting won’t make any money since P2 will always fold. However
in the real world, P2 might not realize they are always beat, so P1 can bet any size they think
might induce P2 to make a bad call. I’ve seen this trick work many times in situations where a
player makes a tiny bet when they clearly have zero bluffs and then get called by a weaker player
who mucks their hand a second later and mutters “yeah… nice hand.”
                        Table 155: All of P1’s Range Beats P2’s Range

  At equilibrium, position doesn’t matter in this set-up, but P1 has the option to exploitatively
always bet when IP and check or bet when OOP, depending on what P1 thinks will get P2 to put
more money in the pot.


P1’s Range is Polarized but Has More Nuts Than Air




                   Table 156: P1 Has the Nuts 90% of the Time and Air 10%
  In the previous case where all of P1’s range is stronger than P2’s range, P1’s EV is the entire
pot. We know that when a player makes a bet, the size of each bet lays different pot odds to the
opponent, making a call profitable or unprofitable depending on the bet-size used. Since P1’s
range is much stronger than P2’s range, is there a bet-size so that P2 does not have a profitable
call and is then always forced to fold, allowing P1 to win 100% of the pot? (Table 156)
  Let’s make a simple test. The pot is 100 chips. If P1 makes a pot-size bet of 100 chips with all
hands, P2’s pot odds will be 33% while only having 10% equity with their range, so calling
would be -EV. So, the answer to our question is yes. Given P1 has more nut hands than air in
their range, if they bet big enough on the river with all hands, P2 won’t be able to call, despite
having some equity in the pot, resulting in that equity being denied.
   If P1 bets too small, giving P2 the right odds to call, P2 will indeed call and P1’s EV will be
less than the entire pot. So, P1 must bet big enough to force P2 to fold. However, betting too big
involves some risk for P1. What happens if P2 slowplayed a big hand or if our assumptions about
P2’s range were wrong and they show up with a monster hand that we didn’t expect?
   Even if there are many different large bets that would do the job for P1, we should find the
smallest possible bet-size that allows P1 to win the entire pot, achieving maximum EV with the
minimum risk. For this, we can find P1’s bet-size that will make P2 indifferent to calling and
folding when P1 bets their entire range.
Where:
Starting pot = 1
EQ is P2 equity
B is P1 bet-size

  In our example, P2’s range only wins when P1 holds 44 and that represents 0.10 of P2’s total
range. So, P2’s EQ against P1 is 10%, and P1’s minimum bet-size that allows P1 to win the full
pot is:
  The minimum bet-size that allows P1 to win the full pot is only 12.5% of the size of the pot. If
P1 bets any smaller with their entire range, then P2 will have a profitable call (Table 157).




                                    Table 157: P1 Bet-sizing

   If P2 had more equity in the pot, P1’s minimum bet-size would get bigger, and even if P2 was
ahead of 40% of P1’s range, P1 would still be able to win the entire pot by betting 2x the pot.
   If P1 has enough chips to force P2 to fold their entire range, then the EV of P1’s bluff combos
is the same as their value hands. In this example, if P1 bets 12.5% of the pot or more, the EV of
AA is 100% of the pot and the EV of 44 is also 100% of the pot, while the EV of P2 is 0.
   If P1 has enough chips to make the minimum bet required to win the entire pot with their
entire range, P2’s equilibrium strategy is to always fold bluff-catchers no matter which bet-size
P1 uses. P1 can always obtain an EV of the full pot by betting big enough with bluffs and there is
nothing P2 can do to stop this. So, P1 could choose to use a large bet-size with all bluffs
combined with the right ratio of value combos, so that they always win the full pot with that bet-
size. With excess value hands, P1 could use any other bet-size they think P2 would call and
achieve an even larger EV than the full pot. Any time P2 decides to call against any bet-size, P1
could manipulate their range advantageously. For this reason, the only strategy that is always the
highest EV for P2 is to always fold.
   In this set-up, position is also irrelevant as P2 will never bet. P1 will bet 100% of the time and
P2 will always fold.
   When P1 does not have enough chips to make the minimum required bet-size to bet with their
entire range, they will be forced to give up with some of their bluffs. They will bet all nut hands
alongside the optimal frequency of bluffs (Alpha of their value range) to make P2 indifferent to
calling and folding, and P2 will defend 1-Alpha of the time.


P1’s Range is Polarized but Has More Air Than Nuts




                    Table 158: P1 has the Nuts 10% of the Time and Air 90%

   Since P1’s range has more than 50% air, there is no bet they can make with their entire range
to force P2 to always fold. P1 has to give up with some of their bluffs and play the polarized vs
bluff-catcher strategy with their nut hands by betting as large as possible and then adding enough
bluffs to make P2 indifferent between calling and folding (Table 158).
   P2 has P1 beat 90% of the time, but their equilibrium strategy is still to always check. P2
cannot bet because P1’s range is polarized. P1 knows when they have the best hand and can
choose to only call when this is the case.
   When facing a bet, P2 has to call with 1-Alpha frequency to make P1’s bluffs indifferent,
otherwise P1 will incrementally increase their bluffing frequency.
   If you ever find yourself in a situation similar to P2 where you have the best hand the majority
of the time but your opponent’s range is mostly air, you are forced to play passively despite
having the best hand more often than not.
   P1 should bet as large as possible so that they can include more bluffs in their betting range.
The hands they are bluffing with will still be indifferent to bluffing and checking (if P2 calls 1-
Alpha), but the branch of the game tree where P1 gives up will happen less often.
   In our example, if P1 has a pot-size bet, they have to go all-in with a 2-to-1 value-to-bluff
ratio, so they will go all-in 15% of the time with 10% value and 5% air. Their EV will be 15% of
the pot, and P2 will win the pot 85% of the time when P1 has air and gives up. In this set-up,
position is irrelevant. Both players will play in the exact same way regardless of position.


Polarized vs Bluff Catcher with Traps




                          Table 159: P1’s Range is Perfectly Polarized.
                         P2’s Range is 90% Bluff-catchers and 10% Nuts

   As we have seen from the polarized vs bluff-catchers abstract models, the player with the
bluff-catcher’s range is in a disadvantageous situation and thus players should try to avoid
getting themselves in this position. One way P2 can reduce P1’s leverage is to slowplay some
nutted hands. The slowplayed nutted hands in P2’s range are traps (Table 159).
   In the polarized vs bluff-catcher model with no traps, P1’s EV increases with bet-size, but it is
capped at the size of the pot. No player’s EV can ever be greater than the pot. If P1 had a strategy
that would grant them more than the pot, then P2 could simply revert to a 100% fold strategy and
never lose further chips. Also, the lowest P1’s EV can get is 0.5 pot because they have the
winning hand 50% of the time. So even if they simply check all the time they still get at least
50% of the pot.
  Notice how at a bet-size of about 4x pot, P1 captures 90% of the pot. After that the gains
become quite marginal to the point that betting 10x pot will only win about 5% more of the pot,
95% total (Diagram 132).
  What happens when P2 has some traps in their range? Is there a cap to how big P1’s bet-size
can be?




                                        Diagram 132
                                          Diagram 133

   When 10% of P2’s range are traps, P1’s EV maxes out at SPR 1.25 (Diagram 133). After that,
their EV starts to diminish and P1 is forced to check more frequently until the SPR is so high that
they can no longer go all-in profitably, resulting in a checking strategy 100% of the time. When
P1 checks (50% of the time), they win the pot 90% of the time, so their EV is 45% of the pot.

    Going all-in for a massive overbet when your opponent can have traps is a substantial
  mistake and will lose you a lot of EV.

   With low SPRs, the threat of going all-in and occasionally running into the nuts is not as big
an issue, but when SPR gets high, it can be costly and P1 should bet smaller than all-in,
particularly if P2 can have a lot of traps.
   The problem with betting smaller than all-in is that P2 will now have the option to x/r the
river. When P2 x/r, they will be effectively turning some of their bluff-catchers into bluffs and
P1’s value-bets will now turn into bluff-catchers! This situation is particularly bad for P1 as in
the whole branch of the game tree where they get x/r, P2 will be perfectly polarized against P1,
and P2 can increase their EV by x/r bigger. The deeper the stacks, the bigger P2’s raise size can
be and the more EV will be captured.
   There is a trade off between going all-in and using a non-all-in bet-size. To find the exact bet-
size B that maximizes P1’s EV (which may or may not be all-in), we will borrow the next
formula from Will Tipton’s Book Expert Heads-up No-Limit Hold’em.




  (The calculation of this formula requires the use of Calculus and we won’t be showing the
proof in this text.)


Where:
S = Stack size
B = Bet-size
T = traps %

   When P2 can have traps in their range, P1’s bet-size actually decreases and the more traps P2
can have, the smaller P1’s bet-size becomes to the point where this bet-size approaches 0 and
they can no longer bet. At that point, P1 is forced to check their entire range.
   In this set-up, position is irrelevant for the small portion of traps in P2’s range. P2 will never
lead and P1 will always bet nut hands alongside enough air while giving up with the rest of the
air. However, if P2 has too many traps, the nature of the game changes and position becomes
relevant.
             Table 160: P1’s Optimal Bet-size by Stack Depth and P2’s % of Traps

   When stacks are deep enough such that if P2 arrives to the river with too many traps, P1 will
start to check back 100% of the time. P2 will miss value from their traps because they will never
have the opportunity to win any extra bets. At that point, P2 will be incentivized to start leading
some traps which will make P1 bet more often when checked to, and this trade off will
eventually reach an equilibrium point where the EV of leading some traps will be the same as the
EV of checking them. P2 will then play a mixed strategy, slowplaying just enough nuts to protect
their checking range.

     In general x/r is not a great way to deny your opponent’s equity and it is not a great way
  to get value. What it actually achieves is preventing opponents from value-betting thin and
  from bluffing a lot when you check to them. Just having 10-20% traps in your range is
  enough to accomplish both at most stack depths.

  In this set-up, P2 will still defend at the MDF and their calling frequency will be:
Linear Distributions
So far we have focused our discussion of river abstract models where we are able to partition the
players’ ranges into disconnected categories of hands that were clearly identifiable as nuts, air,
bluff-catchers and traps. However, in many real poker situations, both players’ ranges will
contain a mixture of hands made up from all of these categories.
   Since the players’ range distributions won’t necessarily divide into non-overlapping
categories, we need to create a system to categorize these linear distributions.
   Categorizing all hands according to their equity with 1 being the strongest hand and 0 the
weakest, we can split the ranges into three main sections. These will be with value hands at the
top, checking hands in the middle and bluffing hands at the bottom, effectively betting a
polarized distribution. If the player is OOP, they will be checking some value hands as traps, so
the checking range is not 100% bluff-catchers.




                        Table 161: Hypothetical River Strategy Example

  The bottom value hand as well as the best bluff will be indifferent to betting and checking.
The player will bet all value hands above the bottom value hand and will bluff all hands that are
below the strongest bluff.
   The checking range consists of everything in the middle and, for all of those hands, the EV of
checking will be higher than the EV of betting.
   The player facing a bet will split their range into two main categories, defending hands and
folding hands. If the bet-size faced is all-in, the defending player needs to find the threshold hand
that is indifferent to calling and folding and call all hands better than that threshold. If the bet-
size is not all-in, the defending player will raise all their traps alongside an appropriate number of
bluffs.




                         Table 162: Hypothetical River Strategy Example

   The key to river play when players have linear distributions consists of correctly identifying
these threshold hands. In the very simple example where the players’ ranges are symmetric, OOP
can only bet or check, and their checking hands have zero equity. If OOP bets, IP can call or
fold.
   The next equations explain the very simple example where all the checking hands have 0%
equity and players can only bet, check and call, but not raise.
Where:
b = bet size
p = pot size
hc = defending player threshold calling hand
hb = betting player threshold betting hand
EQhc = equity of the threshold calling hand

  In this example, the betting player will bet all hands that are better than hb and simply give up
with the rest. The defending player will call all hands that are better than hc and fold the rest.


Example
Assume the players are going all-in for a pot sized bet with


b=p=s
s = stack size

  The threshold calling hand for the defending player will be:




  Given the ranges are symmetric, then
  and the threshold betting hand for the betting player is:




  In this case, the betting player’s threshold is 1/4, which means they are betting all better hands,
so 3/4 of all hands. Since the defending player is getting 2-to-1 pot odds, 2/3 of the betting hands
beat hc and the other 1/3 of hands, which lose to hc, are pure bluffs since they never win when
called.
   For more complex situations where the checking hands have equity and players can raise, the
equations are far more complex, and calculating the threshold hands by hand is not possible in
most cases. For this reason, the best approach to study river abstract models with linear
distributions is to replicate them in a GTO solver. In the next section, we will go over a couple of
these examples, but I encourage the reader to test these and other situations in order to get
proficient with the general strategies.


Symmetric Range
                     Table 163: Both Players Have the Exact Same Range

  We already studied this type of linear distribution (Table 163) in the [0-1] Single Street Toy
Game section, but it had the constraint of OOP always checking to IP. This time, we will study
equilibrium play when OOP is allowed to bet the river.




                            Table 164: OOP Strategy (First Action)

   With SPR of 1 or more, OOP will check middle strength hands TT-66 alongside most AA-KK
for protection. They will bet with QQ-JJ plus the rest of their AA and KK as well as 55 as a
bluff, using a 1/3-pot bet-size.
   With SPR 1 or less, OOP’s strategy is to go all-in with most of the top of their range JJ+,
while checking about 10-20% of them to protect the checking range and to bluff with 55. As the
SPR gets shallower, OOP’s value range expands from JJ+ at 0.75 SPR to 99+ at 0.25 SPR (Table
164).
   With SPR 5+, IP never goes all-in after OOP checks. Their strategy consists of splitting their
range between pot and half-pot bet-sizes, betting pot with most AA – KK, while also using some
in the smaller size to protect against being x/r, while checking back their middle strength hands
TT-77. QQ-JJ are bet using the half-pot bet-size. 55 and some 66 are used as bluffs in both bet-
sizes (Table 165).




                              Table 165: IP Strategy Versus Check

  With SPR 2, IP will go all-in with most of their AA-KK, using the smaller size for QQ and
some JJ, bluffing 66-55 and checking back TT-77. With SPR 1 and under, IP will check back all
middle strength hands TT-77, go all-in with a polar range of JJ+ and 55-66, expanding their
value range as SPRs gets smaller to include 88+ with SPR 0.25.


Ranges Overlap in the Middle
In this situation, some hands in P1’s range are stronger than all of P2’s range and some hands in
P2’s range are weaker than all of P1’s Range (Table 166).
              Table 166: Some P1 Hands Beat all P2 and Some P2 Lose to all P1

P1 is IP and P2 is OOP

When P2 is OOP, they will never bet unless the SPR is very small.




                             Table 167: P1 Strategy Versus Check

  After P2 checks, P1 will have two different bet-sizes when SPR is 2+, all-in and 125%-pot.
The all-in bet-size will be used with the nut hands P2 cannot have (AA-KK), and the 125%-pot
bet-size will be used with the value range that overlaps with P2’s range (QQ). 55-66 plus some
77 will be used as bluffs and the middle strength hands (JJ-77) are checked back.
  With SPR 1 and below, P1 will check back middle strength hands (TT-77) and will go all-in
with a polarized range of AA-JJ for value and 55-66 as bluffs (Table 167).

P1 is OOP and P2 is IP




                Table 168: P1’s Strategy (OOP First Action) with SPR Above 2

   With SPR 2 or more, P1 likes to develop two different bet-sizes, all-in, which will be used
with the nut hands P2 cannot have in their range (AA-KK), and a smaller 25%-pot bet-size with
the top of their range that overlaps with P2’s range (QQ-TT). 66-55 are used as bluffs and 99-77
are checked alongside a very small fraction of AA-KK and most of QQ to protect P1’s checking
range (Table 168).
   With SPR 1 and below, P1 will also develop the use of two different bet-sizes, all-in and a
smaller 10%-pot size. The all-in bet-size will be used with a polarized range of JJ+ and 66-55,
and the smaller bet-size will be used with TT-99, a sliver of AA-JJ and some 66 as bluffs. The
checking range will be 88-77 plus a small frequency of TT+ for protection. As the SPR gets
shallower, P1 gets to jam more hands and starts to move TT-99 into the all-in range (Table 169).




                Table 169: P1’s Strategy (OOP First Action) with SPR Below 2
                              Table 170: P2’s Strategy Versus IP Check

   After P1 checks, P2 will be checking back middle strength hands (99-66) and will bet a
polarized range with QQ-TT for value and bluff some frequency of their weakest hands (55-33).
When stacks are very deep, P2 cannot use a large bet-size because they risk getting x/r, but as
stacks get shallower, P2 can increase their bet-size to 75%-pot, and with an SPR of 1 and less, P2
will simply go all-in with their betting range (Table 170).


Blocker Effects
For this section, we will modify the board and ranges as follows:


Board: 8♥3♥3♣2♥2♦
Pot: 100 chips
Effective Stack: 500 chips
Betting Structure: Villain always checks to Hero, Hero can bet 25, 50, 100 or all-in. If Hero
uses a non all-in bet-size, Villain can x/r all-in.

Blocker Example 1

Hero is IP with a range of:


  ♦ 9 combos of nut flush: A♥K♥-A♥9♥, A♥7♥-A♥4♥

  ♦ 12 combos of nut blocker: A♥Kx, A♥Qx, A♥Jx, A♥Tx

  ♦ 24 combos of lower flush blocker: K♥Qx, Q♥Jx, J♥Tx, T♥9x, 9♥8x, 7♥6x, 6x5x, 5♥4
  ♦ 6 combos of non-flush blockers: 7♠6♠, 7♠5♠, 7♠4♠, 6♠5♠, 6♠4♠, 5♠4♠

  Villain is OOP with a range of 45 flush combos that aren’t blocked by the board:


  ♦ 9 combos of nut flush: A♥K♥-A♥9♥, A♥7♥-A♥4♥

  ♦ 8 combos of K-high flush: K♥Q♥-K♥9♥, K♥7♥-K♥4♥

  ♦ 7 combos of Q-high flush: Q♥J♥-Q♥9♥, Q♥7♥-Q♥4♥

  ♦ 6 combos of J-high flush: J♥T♥-J♥9♥, J♥7♥-J♥4♥

  ♦ 5 combos of T-high flush: T♥9♥, T♥7♥-T♥4♥

  ♦ 4 combos of 9-high flush: 9♥7♥-9♥4♥

  ♦ 3 combos of 7-high flush: 7♥6♥-7♥4♥

  ♦ 2 combos of 6-high flush: 6♥5♥, 6♥4♥

  ♦ 1 combo of 5-high flush: 5♥4♥

   In this set-up, the Villain will never bet, even though all of their hands are flushes, because
Hero’s range is polarized. Hero either has the nuts or a bluff. Clearly Hero has many more bluffs
than value combos so, at equilibrium, cannot bet them all. In this case, what type of hands would
make the best bluffing combos for Hero, and what would be the optimal bet-size?
   This situation is similar to the polarized vs bluff catchers with traps abstract model but in this
situation, if Hero has the nuts or the nut blocker, then the Villain’s range contains zero traps. For
this reason, the best bluffing combos for Hero are the nut flush blocker. By betting only with the
nut flush and the nut blocker, Hero is effectively turning the game into the polarized vs bluff
catchers toy game and, as we know, Hero will maximize EV by going all-in with all value
combos and just enough bluffs to make the Villain indifferent to calling and folding. In fact,
bluffing with non-nut blockers will lose Hero EV. The Villain has to defend 1-Alpha of their
range to make Hero’s bluffs indifferent to betting and checking.
   In this situation, the GTO solver might show a higher calling frequency than expected for the
Villain. This occurs because the solver accounts for the calls with the “ghost” nut flushes that the
Villain never really has. Ignoring the 9 nut flush combos, the Villain’s calling frequency will be
exactly 1-Alpha. Some GTO solvers have the option to display real frequencies.
Blocker Example 2

Hero is IP with a range of:


  ♦ 9 combos of nut flush: A♥K♥-A♥9♥, A♥7♥-A♥4♥

  ♦ 24 combos of lower flush blocker: K♥Qx, Q♥Jx, J♥Tx, T♥9x, 9♥8x, 7♥6x, 6x5x, 5♥4x.

  ♦ 6 combos of non-flush blockers: 7♠6♠, 7♠5♠, 7♠4♠, 6♠5♠, 6♠4♠, 5♠4♠

  Villain is OOP with a range of 45 flush combos that aren’t blocked by the board:


  ♦ 9 combos of nut flush: A♥K♥-A♥9♥, A♥7♥-A♥4♥

  ♦ 8 combos of K-high flush: K♥Q♥-K♥9♥, K♥7♥-K♥4♥

  ♦ 7 combos of Q-high flush: Q♥J♥-Q♥9♥, Q♥7♥-Q♥4♥

  ♦ 6 combos of J-high flush: J♥T♥-J♥9♥, J♥7♥-J♥4♥

  ♦ 5 combos of T-high flush: T♥9♥, T♥7♥-T♥4♥

  ♦ 4 combos of 9-high flush: 9♥7♥-9♥4♥

  ♦ 3 combos of 7-high flush: 7♥6♥-7♥4♥

  ♦ 2 combos of 6-high flush: 6♥5♥, 6♥4♥

  ♦ 1 combo of 5-high flush: 5♥4♥

  In this set-up, we removed the nut blockers from Hero’s range. Just as before, the Villain will
never lead into Hero. Now that Hero does not have the nut blocker, what should their strategy
be? Should they still go all-in or should they use a smaller bet-size than previously?
  Now that Hero does not have the nut blocker, they can no longer remove the traps from the
Villain’s range. Going all-in for a large overbet without the nut blocker will lose Hero a lot of
EV so, in this case, Hero will be betting the size of the pot.
  Which combos are now best to use as bluffs? When I ask this question to my students, many
rush to say that now that the nut blocker is missing, Hero should be using the second nut blocker
(K♥) combos. However, in reality, no blocker is better than a non-nut blocker. The solver prefers
to bluff with the low spade combos instead. The reason for this is because if Hero chooses to
bluff a given flush blocker, say the K♥ combos, the solver could adjust to start overfolding the
king-high flushes and calling with more of the lower flush combos.
   If we add a few nut blocker combos to Hero’s range, but not enough to go all-in with their
entire value range, Hero will split their value range into two sections, going all-in with as many
nut combos as can be accommodated plus the nut blockers, and betting full pot with the rest of
the value range, using the low spade combos as bluffs.
   For SPR 1 and lower, Hero’s bet-size will always be all-in if they have enough nut blocker
combos. Hero should go all-in with enough blockers to make the Villain indifferent, and give up
the rest. If there are not enough nut blockers in Hero’s range, they can complete their bluffing
frequency with low spade combos. If Hero has more flushes in their range other than the nut
flush, then flush blockers become more valuable and are higher EV bluffs than non-flush
blockers.



Practical Applications
This section is a quick summary of the most important river characteristics and how to apply
them in-game.


OOP River Betting

Range composition that favors a high x/r frequency vs OOP bet


  ♦ OOP has a lot of hands that want to realize equity. Having many traps reduces IP’s overall
    betting frequency and helps OOP realize equity.

  ♦ OOP has a small number of strong hands but they are nutted.

  ♦ IP has a range structure that makes them want to bet at a high frequency after a check.

  ♦ x/r protects OOP from IP’s thin value-bets.

  ♦ On dry boards after x/c x/c, OOP will usually not have much pure air and will often use
    hands like bottom pair that are typically x/f as x/r bluffs.
Why bet from OOP


  ♦ Fundamental difference in position is that IP’s checks realize their equity. Betting from
    OOP prevents IP from realizing equity for free.

  ♦ Range compositions determine how much the opponent wants to bet and check.
    Generally, you want to bet when IP wants to check back often.


OOP bets rivers after IP checks back the turn


  ♦ On average, IP’s range after checking back the turn will be more condensed and OOP’s
    range will be more polarized.

  ♦ OOP should bet the river at a reasonable frequency, approximately 20-30% of the time.

  ♦ If IP checks back on a high betting frequency turn, that makes their range getting to the
     river a lot weaker, while if they check back a relatively bad turn, the check back range
     will be stronger.


OOP leads river after x/c, x/c


  ♦ On average, after IP bets twice, their range will be very polarized and OOP’s range will
    be more condensed. Most of OOP’s hands after x/c, x/c want a cheap showdown.

  ♦ After x/c, x/c, the situations where OOP wants to donk bet the river are somewhat rare.
    They usually occur when the river card, or often the turn and river card together,
    significantly shift the polarization of the ranges. When this happens, OOP will
    unexpectedly have many strong hands and IP will tend to want to check back the river at
    a high frequency. Donk bet frequency can be 75%+ in these cases.

  ♦ While the cases requiring river donk bets are rare, the EV impact is usually high enough
    to be worth studying. Some examples are four-flush and four-straight boards, when the
    river pairs the second highest card on the board, and runner-runner pair.


IP River Betting
Betting from IP is much simpler than betting from OOP. After OOP has checked, their range will
generally be weak and mostly made of bluff-catchers. If your range is polarized, bet as big as
you can and add enough bluffs to make OOP indifferent to calling and folding. If your range is
condensed, check back your middle strength hands, bet the top of your range and use the weakest
hands as bluffs.
  If your range is not very nutted, you can still value-bet, but choose a small bet-size,
particularly if OOP can be trapping. If your range is too weak or OOP can have too many traps,
checking back and taking a free showdown is usually good. Don’t forget to always add a small
frequency of your nutted hands to your small bet-size so you are protected against x/r, although
this is unnecessary if OOP has no traps.

IP Play vs River Bets

The best exploit vs players who don’t bet the river often enough is to value-bet less thinly and to
fold the river more often when they bet. If you know OOP won’t be betting the river too often,
you can get away with c-betting the flop a lot more. This is because your EV when you called is
higher, as you get a lot of free showdowns and get to realize the equity of many marginal hands
that you wouldn’t normally be able to.
   Conversely, the best exploit vs players who frequently bet the river after turn checks is to not
c-bet the flop too often, so you don’t end up with as much air that has to check back the turn and
then fold to a river lead. From IP, it is important that you check back the turn with some hands
that are capable of raising river bets, otherwise OOP can get away with a lot of betting if IP’s
range contains too much air/bluff catchers.


River Calling Strategies

Blockers


  ♦ On the river, all bluff-catchers are equal except in how they block value hands and don’t
    block bluffs.

  ♦ When you block the opponent’s value range, call more often.

  ♦ When you block the opponent’s bluffing range, fold more often.

  ♦ When you block the opponent’s value and bluffing range, look for other decision points.
  ♦ When you have no blockers, it is irrelevant, or slightly negative.


River Call Decision Points


  ♦ Use their value range as a starting point. Even against very tight players, always call
    hands in their value range.

  ♦ Never call with bluff-catchers if the Villain doesn’t have enough bluffs.

  ♦ If there is a lot of air in the Villain’s range, they will be more likely to be bluffing.

  ♦ Perception matters. If we are perceived to be a calling station, assume an expanded value
    range. If we are perceived as weak, expect a narrow value range (and wider bluffing
    range).

  ♦ Defending close to 1-Alpha is a good approximation in most river spots.

   You can use the knowledge of the river set-ups to improve your pre-flop, flop, and turn play.
If you know beforehand what the best possible river scenarios are for you, then all your earlier
street play should focus on arriving to those beneficial river situations. At the same time this
maximizes the likelihood of you getting there more often with the correct range composition.
   Your opponents will be doing the same and this is exactly how GTO solvers work out the
equilibrium strategies on earlier streets. They work out turn strategies that lead to the optimal
river situations, then they also work out the flop strategies that lead to those turn situations. They
then repeat this for pre-flop play. All of this is done with the single goal of maximizing each
player’s EV by creating the most profitable situation possible that leads to the most profitable
future situations. This happens until equilibrium is reached and both players are playing GTO.
Failing to do so at any point during a hand creates imbalances that will inevitably lead to
unfavorable situations that your opponents can exploit, and that is what exploitative play is all
about.
FINAL WORD
   We have covered a lot of ground in Modern Poker Theory but there is far, far more to the
game of poker than could ever be covered in a single volume. My goal when writing this book
was not to solve the entire game and give all the answers but to provide the reader with the tools
needed so that they can find the answers themselves.
   As science and technology progress they shape our world and, with it, the game of poker we
all love. New software and strategies will continue to emerge but they will be useless unless we
understand the fundamentals of the game. Once we have achieved this learning, we can use the
tools to increase our edge. Realize that the results from tools are not oracles that should be
followed blindly.
   Writing this book has been an amazing experience. I am incredibly thankful for having the
opportunity to share my thoughts with you all and I sincerely hope I was able to help you get a
step closer to achieving all your poker goals and dreams.
   Best of luck and see you at the tables.

                                                                                Michael Acevedo
